---
author: Satish Talim
categories:
- interview
- rails
- ruby
date: 2007-12-04
layout: post
title: 'Josh Software: Making its mark in Ruby on Rails'
---

*Pune is now increasingly becoming the hot-bed of Ruby on Rails activity
in India and Josh Software Pvt. Ltd. are strongly making a mark in this
field. Satish Talim of RubyLearning.com recently talked to Gautam Rege,
one of the founders of this company.*<!--more-->

![Gautam
Rege](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/rege.jpg "Gautam Rege")

**Satish\>\> Could you tell us something about yourself – your
background, where you are based?**

**Gautam\>\>** I was born in India. I have been in Pune, one of the
busiest IT hubs in India. I have done my computer engineering from Pune
Institute of Computer Technology (PICT) and have passed out in the year
2000. After working for a few services based companies like Zensar and
Cybage I got exposure to product companies like Veritas (now Symantec).
It was always my aim to be self-employed and when I found the right
partner in my friend **Sethupathi Asokan**, we both started **Josh
Software Pvt. Ltd.** As is in India, you just have to love cricket.
Sethu (as he is lovingly known as) and I played cricket for Veritas and
the bond did not stop there. We went on to become good friends and now
partners in business.

My father served in the Indian Army for 20 years before taking
pre-mature retirement. He and my elder brother have started an
environment friendly firm called Mailhem Engineers Pvt. Ltd. which has
been working in the Waste Management area for the past 15 years. The
determination and grit I have seen in my brother and father has greatly
helped me in my software business.

**Satish\>\> Could you tell us a little more about Josh Software Pvt.
Ltd.?**

**Gautam\>\>** Josh Software Pvt. Ltd. is a one and half year old
company. We are primarily into software product development. This is
quite a different area. We are neither a product company nor a services
based company. We build software products for others. Our claim to our
success has been our ideology: “You bring to the table your domain
knowledge, we bring our software skills and together we build a software
product”. Josh Software Pvt. Ltd. was earlier [Josh Consultants Pvt.
Ltd.](http://www.joshconsultants.com/) but Sethu and felt to change our
name to showcase our software development abilities.

We are based in Pune and have core skills in **Ruby On Rails**, .NET,
C++ and Java. Given our personal work experience we have worked on
virtually all UNIX, Linux and Windows platforms. Cross platform
development is our forte and we aspire to be one of the top software
product development companies in India.

**Satish\>\> Why did you choose Ruby on Rails (RoR) as a framework?**

**Gautam\>\>** Ironically, we did not choose RoR; RoR chose us! For a
major part of our career, Sethu and I had both been exposed to the
traditional languages and frameworks. Having worked with functional
languages like C and object oriented languages like Java, C++, Python
came as a revelation to me. The concept of an object oriented scripting
language fascinated me. Ruby was still not in the picture until a couple
of years back when we were building our first product. Judging the very
tight deadline to get the product done, we started turning our heads
towards new emerging web frameworks. There was RoR, which we adopted and
have not fallen â€˜out of loveâ€™ since then!

The open source world, the seamless coding of Ruby and the ease of use,
drove us crazy. I preach that if one writes about 100 lines in C, it can
be done in about 50 lines in Perl and about 25 lines in Python. But Ruby
could well do it in 15 lines. This is not based on any theoretical or
practical grounds but simply based on my personal experience in using
these various languages.

**Satish\>\> Were there any surprises in working with RoR?**

**Gautam\>\>** What would be an open source tool / language without
surprises? Surprisingly there were very few in Ruby. However, after
getting familiar with newer and newer Rails plugins like ActiveScaffold,
I did find some unknowns, some surprises and some bugs. Lack of
documentation was sometimes frustrating but the lean mean and simple
Ruby code of the ActiveScaffold plugin, put our doubts to rest. There is
still some way to go in RoR core APIs too, but at the pace it’s moving
it will be only a matter of time before it becomes the de-facto tool for
web development (unless it already has!)

**Satish\>\> Getting back to Josh Software, what are your future
plans?**

**Gautam\>\>** We plan to expand our horizon into various industry
sectors. Currently we have been developing products in the Financial,
Engineering, Medical and IT sectors. We do intend to drive RoR into
these sectors with more vigor. We are also building our own Medical
Software in the Critical Care domain for which I do ask you to stay
tuned.

*Thank you Gautam for taking out time from your busy schedule and
talking to us.*

Technorati Tags: [Gautam Rege](http://technorati.com/tag/Gautam+Rege),
[India](http://technorati.com/tag/India), [Josh
Software](http://technorati.com/tag/Josh+Software),
[Pune](http://technorati.com/tag/Pune), [Ruby on
Rails](http://technorati.com/tag/Ruby+on+Rails), [Sethupathi
Asokan](http://technorati.com/tag/Sethupathi+Asokan)
