---
author: Satish Talim
categories:
- rails
- ruby
date: 2007-04-02
layout: post
title: 'Interview: Bruce Tate'
---

(This interview appeared before on 15th Aug. 2006 on the PuneRuby blog).

Java is no longer the answer to every software development problem.
**Ruby** is exploding onto the scene, just as Java did at the end of
1990s. Developers are driving the revolution, and the amazing
productivity of **Ruby on Rails** is fueling it. So who better to talk
about Ruby and Rails than the strongest proponent of Ruby, **Bruce
Tate**.<!--more-->

In this interview with Satish Talim, Bruce talks about the growth of
Ruby and Rails and what's in it for us in the future.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Hello Bruce, and welcome to PuneRuby. Could you
tell us a little more about yourself?

**Bruce Tate\>\>** Thanks for this opportunity. It's good to see **Ruby
growing in India today**. I am a consultant, author, and speaker from
Austin, Texas. I've written two Ruby books, and five Java books. Just
over a year ago, I moved away from Java, and am writing Ruby full time
now. In my spare time, I'm a father of two, mountain biker, and kayaker.
I hope to run my first marathon this year.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Given the choices out there, why did you select
Ruby?

**Bruce Tate\>\>** Ruby is a beautiful language–one that's much more
dynamic than any other mainstream object oriented language– and a
popular one. With a beautiful language, I can be more productive. With a
popular one, I can put food on the table.

Ruby's roots have a stronger theoretical foundation than Java or C++.
Ruby brings us closer to the roots of object oriented programming, with
concepts such as delayed binding and message passing that were
popularized with Smalltalk and Self. Ruby also brings us closer to the
next level of abstraction: functional programming.

Finally, Rails gives us a catalyst. It's a fantastic framework that
breaks many long-standing conventions, to dramatic effect.

**Satish Talim\>\>** How did you learn Ruby and when?

**Bruce Tate\>\>** I learned Ruby through Ruby on Rails. I used Rails on
an application for a start up, and we were tremendously productive. We
could do in days what it would take weeks to accomplish in Java. I've
been hooked since then.

I've used Rails for applications requiring 100 to 150 tables. They are
all the same kinds of applications, to a certain extent. They have
demanding user interface requirements, database backing, and a new
schema.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Which features of Ruby do you like the most?

**Bruce Tate\>\>** I love the syntax and dynamic typing. Beyond that, I
love the rapid feedback cycle. I just make a change, save, and reload
the browser. I like the metaprogramming features that let me do domain
specific languages whenever I need them. Closures let me iterate over
almost anything, and eliminate all of the wasted effort for tasks that
manage resources, like querying a database, working with a file, or
processing XML.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Do you think Ruby has the potential to be a
mainstream programming language?

**Bruce Tate\>\>** Absolutely. Rails is growing faster than the flagship
open source Java projects. I wrote [“From Java to
Ruby”](http://www.pragmaticprogrammer.com/title/fr_j2r/) to describe why
a manager should take a chance on Ruby, given the right problem space.

**Satish Talim\>\>** What applications, utilities have you developed in
Ruby and what platform are you running these applications on?

**Bruce Tate\>\>** Everything so far has been on \*nix. All of my
customer work for a year and a half has been on Rails. All of it.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Anything else you would like to share with the
PuneRuby members?

**Bruce Tate\>\>** Thanks for giving me this opportunity. You can hear
more of my ideas at [blog.rapidred.com](http://blog.rapidred.com/).

**Satish Talim\>\>** Thanks Bruce for sharing your views with the
PuneRuby members.

**Update:**
[Ruby-Talk](http://aspn.activestate.com/ASPN/Mail/Message/ruby-talk/3236635)
is discussing this interview in their forum.

Technorati Tags: [Bruce Tate](http://technorati.com/tag/Bruce+Tate),
[Interviews](http://technorati.com/tag/Interviews), [Interview: Bruce
Tate](http://technorati.com/tag/Interview%3A+Bruce+Tate), [Ruby
Interviews](http://technorati.com/tag/Ruby+Interviews)

