---
draft: false
title: 14 Ways To Have Fun Coding Ruby
date: 2010-09-22
author: Jeff Schoolcraft
categories:
- Beginners
- Popular
- Ruby
- Ruby Masters
layout: post
permalink: /2010/09/22/14-ways-to-have-fun-coding-ruby/
tags:
- Jeff Schoolcraft
- programming
- Ruby
- Ruby Beginners
- Ruby for Noobs
---

This guest post is contributed by **Jeff Schoolcraft**, who runs [The
Queue Incorporated](http://thequeue.net/) a freelance consultancy that
provides custom software development in Ruby, Rails and iOS. He produces
screencasts with his partner, Istvan Hoka, at
[BDDCasts](http://bddcasts.com/). When he's not building his business
he's trying to keep up with<!--more--> his two daughters and spending the rare free
moment with his wife. You can read his [blog](http://thequeue.net/) and
follow him on twitter [@jschoolcraft](http://twitter.com/jschoolcraft).

![Jeff
Schoolcraft](http://www.gravatar.com/avatar.php?default=http://railsdeveloper.com/images/icons/user-flag-2.png&gravatar_id=196b781eef85b7ce609fd12234cc1f39&rating=G "Jeff Schoolcraft")

## 14 Ways To Have Fun Coding Ruby

From time to time you might need to spice up your romance with code to
make it a bit more interesting and fun. Maybe you've been there? You'd
rather do anything except find the extra closing tag in some view. Or
maybe you've stumbled across some particularly horrible use of google +
copy and paste. Or, you might just be looking to practice. You don't
necessarily want to get on the same treadmill day after day so you're
looking for something new.

Here are 14 different ways to have fun coding Ruby.

## By Yourself {#by_yourself}

### 1. [Ruby Quiz](http://rubyquiz.com/) {#one_ruby_quiz}

The original problem site for our community was based on the [Perl Quiz
of the Week](http://perl.plover.com/qotw/). Sheparded by [James Edward
Gray II](http://blog.grayproductions.net/) for over three years, even
becoming a book from Pragmatic Programmers, it's now under new
management. It spent a bit of time as [Ruby Quiz
2.0](http://www.splatbang.com/rubyquiz/) covering 157-188 by Matthew
Moss. Most recently as [Ruby Quiz 3](http://rubyquiz.strd6.com/)
maintained by [Daniel More](http://strd6.com/).

Basically every Friday a quiz gets sent to the [Ruby Talk mailing
list](http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/20020104.html), you have the weekend
to solve the quiz during a 48 hour no-spoiler period. After that
everyone is invited to contribute solutions and discussion back to the
list. The current quiz maintainer sends a summary of the submissions
back to the list on Thursday.

### 2. [CodeKata](http://codekata.pragprog.com/) {#two_codekata}

[Dave Thomas](http://pragdave.pragprog.com/) put out a series of 15
Kata, or specific practice sessions, to help you flex your Ruby muscles
and excel at Ruby. They're designed to be repeated, practiced and
discarded to come back to again. [Cory
Haines](http://coreyhaines.com/index.html) has most recently carried the
Kata torch with [KataCasts](http://www.katacasts.com/) encouraging the
programming community to do a screen recording of their kata's to
publish for peer review.

### 3. [Project Euler](http://projecteuler.net/index.php?section=problems) {#three_project_euler}

-   What is the smallest number divisible by each of the numbers 1 to
    20?
-   Finding Fibonacci numbers for which the first and last nine digits
    are pandigital.
-   Calculate the sum of all the primes below two million.

These are just a sampling of the 300 (and growing) list of problems to
solve at Project Euler. What's particularly fun about this site is the
need to use math and code to solve the problem. Most (all?) problems
have a way to check your answer.

### 4. [Ruby Programming Challenge for Newbies](http://ruby-challenge.rubylearning.org/) {#four_ruby_programming_challenge_for_newbies}

Even this very site ( RubyLearning.org ) has a set of challenges to test
your Ruby mettle. The problems are submitted by folks in the community
and look to come out monthly.

### 5. [Refactor My Code](http://refactormycode.com/) {#five_refactor_my_code}

While not necessarily a quiz or problem site, per se, it does provide
you with a fairly broad exposure to various types of programming
challenges and gives you an opportunity to refactor (or learn) the
submitted code samples. Not everyone has the benefit of a pair, or even
a colleague to bounce ideas off, so this is a welcome addition.

## With a Partner {#with_a_partner}

### 6. HackFests {#six_hackfests}

Picture this: a bunch of hackers, some notebooks, pizza, beer and a
hankering to build something better (or at all). That's pretty much a
hackfest. Some are organized more than others. Some are just ad hoc
events where you look for an interesting project, or a partner for your
own intersting project. Here's a [Google Search](http://is.gd/u13u) for
HackFests in the last month.

### 7. [Coding Dojo](http://codingdojo.org/) {#seven_coding_dojo}

Coding Dojo's are karate practice for coders. Basically a group of
coders meet to go over a set problem, or kata. They're either completed
as a [PreparedKata](http://codingdojo.org/cgi-bin/wiki.pl?PreparedKata)
or a [RandoriKata](http://codingdojo.org/cgi-bin/wiki.pl?RandoriKata).
The latter involving the whole group in a round-robin pair programming
kata. Here's a [list of some
CodingDojos](http://codingdojo.org/cgi-bin/wiki.pl?back=CodingDojos)

## Code vs Code {#code_vs_code}

### 8. [Ruby Battleship](http://sparring.rubyforge.org/battleship/) {#eight_ruby_battleship}

This evolved from a RubyConf or RailsConf talk about Kata and became an
online battleship competition using Ruby. I don't think there's much
movement in the project anymore, but it's still something you could pull
together for a Ruby Brigade meeting, I imagine.

### 9. [RRobots](http://rrobots.rubyforge.org/index.html) {#nine_rrobots}

RRobots is another older game/competition for Ruby. This one you build
the AI to control robot tanks and destroy your enemies. Again, it's
older but still something you could probably pull together for a Ruby
Brigade or HackFest.

### 10. [RubyWarrior](http://github.com/ryanb/ruby-warrior) {#ten_rubywarrior}

Ruby Warrior is a game designed by [Ryan Bates](http://railscasts.com)
to teach Ruby and AI in a fun, interactive way. You play a warrior
climbing a tower trying to reach the ruby at the top. You have to battle
enemies, rescue captives and reach the stairs all using your code.

### 11. [Rails Rumble](http://railsrumble.com/) {#eleven_rails_rumble}

The first, often duplicated, what kind of a kick ass web application can
you develop in 48 hours using Ruby and Rails competition. It's been
going on since 2007 and it's a load of fun. Either by yourself or with 3
of your mates see what you can build in 48 hours.

## The Rest {#the_rest}

### 12. Scratching an Itch {#twelve_scratching_an_itch}

Build a better mousetrap. Scrape a few places for data and mash it
together to come up with something clever or entertaining. Solve a
problem. Ease some pain. There has to be an idea that you've been
waiting to get some time to implement, just do it.

### 13. Contribute to OSS {#thirteen_contribute_to_oss}

Free as in beer. Free as in speech. Free as in puppies. Feel free to
help out on one of the OSS projects you clearly use day in and day out
that could use some love. Most OSS maintainers will bend over backwards
to get you up to speed and coding on the project. You don't even have to
be able to code at first, a lot of projects can use help with
documentation.

Maybe not your idea of fun to start, but you'll be rewarded by the
welcoming of a new community.

### 14. Mentor {#fourteen_mentor}

Some people love to teach. If you're one of them mentoring someone in
the community is a great way to keep fresh and share your knowledge in a
more personal medium than your blog or twitter. The
[RailsBridge](http://railsbridge.org) maintains the [Rails
Mentors](http://www.railsmentors.org/) portal connecting students with
mentors. Before you say you don't have anything to teach, or worse,
learn, remember that it's not always about the code.

*So -- what do you think? I'd love to double this list, or triple it. If
**you** have ideas, sites, resources, etc. that I haven't mentioned,
please post them as comments here.*

***Post supported by Blue Box Group*:** [Blue Box
Group](http://www.blueboxgrp.com/?utm_source=rubylearning&utm_medium=blog&utm_campaign=rubylearning)
is in the business of providing affordable [Rails
hosting](http://www.blueboxgrp.com/?utm_source=rubylearning&utm_medium=blog&utm_campaign=rubylearning)
solutions! They approach web hosting, virtual servers and dedicated
servers differently, treating each client as a partner and working
towards the common goal of success for their business. They have the
experience, talent and equipment to make your site a success!

***Do read* these awesome Guest Posts:**

-   [Writing modular web applications with
    Rack](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2010/09/21/writing-modular-web-applications-with-rack/)
-   [How to Learn Ruby (or any programming
    language)](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2010/09/20/how-to-learn-ruby-or-any-programming-language/)

