---
draft: false
title: The Ruby movement
date: 2010-09-28
author: Matt Aimonetti
authorlink: "https://plus.google.com/+MattAimonetti/about"
authorgoogleplus: "https://plus.google.com/+MattAimonetti/about"
socialsharing: true
categories:
- Beginners
- Ruby
- Ruby Masters
layout: post
permalink: /2010/09/28/the-ruby-movement/
tags:
- Matt Aimonetti
- programming
- Ruby
- ruby beginner
- Ruby for Noobs
---

This guest post is contributed by **[Matt Aimonetti](http://matt.aimonetti.net/)**,
a Senior Engineer at Sony Playstation in San Diego, CA.
[Matt](https://plus.google.com/+MattAimonetti/about) has been
active in the Ruby community for many years, he developed or contributed
to a lot OSS libraries and frameworks, spoke at users groups and
conferences in the U.S. and abroad. Working with startups, fortune 100
companies and traditional companies, he had the opportunity<!--more--> to be
involved with really captivating Ruby, MacRuby, noSQL/lessSQL, Rails and
Merb projects. Matt is currently writing a
[MacRuby book for O’Reilly](http://macruby.labs.oreilly.com/),
available for free online.

![Matt Aimonetti](http://rubylearning.com/images/m_aimonetti.jpg) An art
movement is a tendency or style in art with a specific common philosophy
or goal, followed by a group of artists during a restricted period of
time, or, at least, with the hay-day of the movement defined within
usually a number of years.^[1](#fn-4744-1)^

The programming world is much closer to the art world than you might
think. Painters, sculptors, architects, singers, writers,
cinematographers and photographers are recognized as artists, while
programmers/coders/hackers are not there yet. One could argue that
programming is more of a craft than an art, but instead of getting into
semantics, let’s look at “programming movements” the same way we look at
“art movements”.

Art is about expressing and generating feelings. Various styles and
techniques can be used and when artists work on a piece, they do not
target the entire world but often limit their focus. Authors often try
to express something personal and communicate their own world view to
their audience. Keeping that in mind, let’s see how this applies to the
Ruby language and its creator: ![Matt
Aimonetti](http://rubylearning.com/images/japanes.jpg), Matsumoto
Yukihiro aka Matz.

![Matsumoto Yukihiro](http://rubylearning.com/images/image4.jpg)\
Matsumoto Yukihiro

Any good designer/artist starts by learning from exemplars. In the dead
cold of a late German autumn in 1705, an impoverished young musician
named J.S. Bach took a 6 month, unpaid leave from his job and walked 250
miles to study the work and ideas of maestro: Dietrich Buxtehude. Now
fast forward to 2010 and take a look at well known Japanese artist
[Takashi Murakami’s](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Takashi_Murakami)
creations.

![Superflat creation for Louis Vuitton - Takashi Murakami,
2003](http://rubylearning.com/images/image1.jpg)\
Superflat creation for Louis Vuitton – Takashi Murakami, 2003

You can see how masters like [Henri
Matisse](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henri_Matisse) and [Andy
Warhol](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andy_Warhol) have helped him create
his own style.

![La gerbe' Henri Matisse,
1953](http://rubylearning.com/images/image0.jpg)\
La gerbe’ Henri Matisse, 1953

Murakami’s Superflat creation for Louis Vuitton, clearly follows
Warhol’s pop-art steps with a strong influence from previous artists
like Matisse, Tezuka and others. [Watch one of the video clips Murakami
produced](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yqaXxSBZTZc&NR=1) for LV.

The same thing goes for programming languages. When designing his
programming language: Ruby, Matz was strongly influenced by Perl,
Smalltalk, Python, Eiffel, Dylan, Lisp and many more languages. But at
the same time he created his own programming language with its own
design values, own desiderata/objectives and own priorities.

Programming is not a religion. And neither are art movements. When you
reflect on art movements, you might like
[impressionism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impressionism) better than
[expressionism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expressionism) but you know
they are both art movements. When you study their contexts a bit more,
you understand the motivations behind each movement better. Don’t
believe even for a second that Ruby is a perfect language nor that it
will be the last programming language you will need to learn.
Programming languages, very much like art movements, are not set in
stone, they evolve and spawn new movements. But regardless of what
happens, if they grow to be important enough, programming movements
influence new languages and keep on living through them.

Alright, enough armchair philosophy. Let’s look at the Ruby movement
values and the problems its designer was trying to address.

In his OSCON 2003 presentation, Matz explained what his motivations in
creating Ruby were. He started by stating that languages influence human
thoughts much more than we think. And that the good programming
languages should help developers:

-   program better.
-   think smarter.
-   finish your job faster.

He defined a few principles that he felt needed to be put in place to
help program better/reduce stress in programming:

-   Principle of least surprise (the developer should not be surprised
    by the way an API works).
-   Principle of succinctness (shorter code is easier to write, read and
    maintain).
-   Principle of human interface (the language should be written for the
    developer, not the machine).

This, in a way, is the Ruby manifesto. It is not uncommon for art
movements to define their rules, perspective and even publish
manifestos. The
[futurists](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Futurist_Manifesto),
[surrealists](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surrealist_Manifesto) and
[dadaists](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Art_manifesto#Dada_Manifesto_1916)
for instance had their own manifestos while others like the
[cubists](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cubism) let [art
critics](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Louis_Vauxcelles) explain their
movements. In his presentation, Matz clearly defined the core values
that he refers to when he is thinking about making a change somewhere.
Each language has its own set of values and they are sometimes in
opposition from one language to the other. It’s up to you, the
developer, to see how these values fit your project and your team.
Unfortunately, there is not (yet) a perfect language that everyone you
can use for everything.

If you are reading this article, you are probably already part of the
Ruby movement or you are looking into it. The two first things you
should probably remember are:

-   to learn and understand Ruby’s values.
-   to be curious about what other “movements” value and how they
    approach challenges.

f you do that, you will first understand the pros and cons of the
language, and you will understand why some aspects of the language can
seem odd to you. (For more info, [read the post I
wrote](http://merbist.com/2010/08/22/discussion-with-a-java-switcher/)
about the discussion I had with an ex-Java developer).

Look at other engineering movements, not only programming languages:

-   [NoSQL movement](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NoSQL) in comparison
    with other Data storing approaches like
    [RDMS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RDMS).
-   Event driven architecture movement like
    [Twisted](http://twistedmatrix.com/trac/) /
    [EventMachine](http://wiki.github.com/eventmachine/eventmachine/) /
    [node.js](http://nodejs.org/).
-   Functional programming movement with
    [Haskell](http://www.haskell.org/), [Clojure](http://clojure.org/),
    [Erlang](http://www.erlang.org/).
-   Look at the Lisp movement (sub functional programming movement) with
    [Scheme](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scheme_(programming_language))
    / [Racket](http://racket-lang.org/) /
    [CommonLisp](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_Lisp).
-   Look at the [Go Programming Language](http://golang.org/), and see
    what it does differently and why

Look at how architects design buildings, how musicians compose music,
how NASA designs rockets. By understanding the main design goal, the
list of objectives and the scope of each approach, you will be able to
understand, value and criticize each movement.

Don’t limit yourself to using idioms and pushing keys on your keyboard
without understanding the “why” behind the “how”. Ruby wants you to
become a better programmer, that is part of the language’s objectives.
Better Ruby developers mean a stronger influence on the Ruby movement
and improvement brought by the community synergy. If you find something
that is not right with Ruby or its community (I have my own list), you
should try to understand why it is like that and ask yourself what you
can do to help. Don’t think for a second that you are not smart or
expert enough. Be passionate and get involved to improve yourself and
the movement as a whole. Take for example artists learning from outside
their paradigms. Picasso and Matisse were friendly rivals, they shared
the same interest in primitivism and [African
art](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/African_art) and influenced each other
while being part of different movements. Directors like [Quentin
Tarantino](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quentin_Tarantino), [Martin
Scorsese](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Scorsese), [John
Woo](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Woo), [Steven
Soderbergh](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steven_Soderbergh), [Brian De
Palma](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brian_De_Palma), [Wim
Wenders](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wim_Wenders), [Oliver
Stone](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oliver_Stone) all have different
styles but all admit to have been directly influenced by [Jean-Luc
Godard](http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000419/) and the *Nouvelle* Vague
movement. Most modern music movements love to borrow from each other to
create interesting new trends.

So when you work on your code, when you are looking at other programming
language, think about art and remember that a movement always benefits
from borrowing ideas from other movements. Don’t forget that one’s own
little programming world is transient, metamorphic and therefore should
remain fun, challenging and welcoming. Educate yourself, stay open
minded and help take the Ruby movement to the next level.

#### Recommended reading (not Ruby specific):

![The Design of Design](http://rubylearning.com/images/image2.jpg) [The
Design of
Design](http://www.amazon.com/Design-Essays-Computer-Scientist/dp/0201362988)

![Hackers & Painters](http://rubylearning.com/images/image5.jpg)
[Hackers &
Painters](http://www.amazon.com/dp/1449389554?tag=merbist-20&camp=213381&creative=390973&linkCode=as4&creativeASIN=1449389554&adid=1DHD48KWCSEWD48FX7DM)

![The Pragmatic Programmer](http://rubylearning.com/images/image3.jpg)
[The Pragmatic Programmer: From Journeyman to
Master](http://www.amazon.com/dp/020161622X?tag=merbist-20&camp=213381&creative=390973&linkCode=as4&creativeASIN=020161622X&adid=1X9WP08X4ADG7QZVSA60)

![The Passionate Programmer](http://rubylearning.com/images/image6.jpg)
[The Passionate
Programmer](http://www.amazon.com/dp/1934356344?tag=merbist-20&camp=213381&creative=390973&linkCode=as4&creativeASIN=1934356344&adid=0MM3E66D9GAYJDEFFT7F)

*So – what do you think? If **you** have ideas, sites, resources, etc.
that I haven’t mentioned, please post them as comments here.*

***Post supported by Sticker Mule*:** [Sticker
Mule](http://www.stickermule.com/t/categories/custom-stickers) prints
custom stickers starting at \$69 for 100. They aspire to be every Ruby
developer’s favorite sticker printing service. A \$25 off coupon (RL01)
is available for Ruby Learning readers through October 31st, 2010. Enter
code RL01 during checkout.

***Do read* these awesome Guest Posts:**

-   [Almost everything is an object (and everything is almost an
    object!)](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2010/09/27/almost-everything-is-an-object-and-everything-is-almost-an-object/)
-   [So… you’re new to
    Ruby!](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2010/09/24/so-youre-new-to-ruby/)
-   [Incorporating Web APIs to spark computer programming
    exercises](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2010/09/23/incorporating-web-apis-to-spark-computer-programming-exercises/)
-   [14 Ways To Have Fun Coding
    Ruby](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2010/09/22/14-ways-to-have-fun-coding-ruby/)
-   [Writing modular web applications with
    Rack](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2010/09/21/writing-modular-web-applications-with-rack/)
-   [How to Learn Ruby (or any programming
    language)](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2010/09/20/how-to-learn-ruby-or-any-programming-language/)

Technorati Tags: [Ruby](http://technorati.com/tag/Ruby),
[Programming](http://technorati.com/tag/Programming), [Matt
Aimonetti](http://technorati.com/tag/Matt+Aimonetti)

1.  [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Art\_movement](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Art_movement).
    [↩](#fnref-4744-1)

