---
draft: false
title: 'Interview: Author Peter Cooper'
date: 2009-08-20
author: Satish Talim
authorlink: http://satishtalim.com
socialsharing: true
authorgoogleplus: https://plus.google.com/+SatishTalim/about
authorlinkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/satishtalim
authortwitter: http://twitter.com/IndianGuru
authorfacebook: http://www.facebook.com/satishtalim/about
categories:
- Beginners
- Book Promotions
- Interview
- Promotions
- Ruby
layout: post
permalink: /2009/08/20/interview-author-peter-cooper/
tags:
- Beginning Ruby
- Book promotion
- Peter Cooper
- ruby programming
---
Our Book Promotion: "**Beginning Ruby 2nd Edition**" starts soon. Win
one of four books to be given out for active participation. The coolest
thing?<!--more--> Author **Peter Cooper** will be on site to answer questions!
[Click
here](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2009/08/12/book-promotion-beginning-ruby-2nd-edition/)
for more details. Here, in this brief interview, Satish Talim of
RubyLearning talks to Peter Cooper.

![Peter
Cooper](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/petercooper.jpg "Peter Cooper")

**Satish\>\>** Peter, could you tell us something about yourself -- your
background, where you are based?

**David\>\>** I'm Peter Cooper, mostly known in the Ruby community for
running [Ruby Inside](http://www.rubyinside.com/) and
[RubyFlow](http://www.rubyflow.com/). I was also heavily involved with
the Rails community in 2005 and 2006 and released some of the first
tagging and AJAX stuff for Rails developers, though I haven't been
particularly involved with the Rails community much since then. I'm also
the author of Beginning Ruby, the subject of this promo, have been an
advisor and contributor on a couple of other Ruby books (such as Ruby In
Practice and Design Patterns in Ruby).

I live in the north of England in a pretty remote area. On the plus
side, I have a great Internet connection, a cheap(ish) mortgage, and
lots of open space so in theory it should be perfect for someone in my
line of work! Since selling my startup, [Feed
Digest](http://feed.informer.com/), back in 2007 I've been able to spend
more time working on "experiments" and what were previously side
projects, such as Ruby Inside.

![Beginning Ruby 2nd
Edition](http://rubylearning.com/images/begrubyicon1.png "Beginning Ruby 2nd Edition")

**Satish\>\>** What inspired/prompted you to write the book "Beginning
Ruby"? What need were you trying to fill?

**Peter\>\>** I was routinely posting about Ruby on my personal blog
back in 2005 and an editor from Apress got in touch with me to throw
around ideas about writing their first Ruby book. I've always been keen
to write a beginners' book on some topic or another so it seemed like a
perfect opportunity to write a beginners' book to Ruby. I also felt that
Ruby didn't have any good books dedicated to beginners. The Pickaxe, for
example, is an awesome reference book but I found it poor to learn Ruby
from from scratch. I wanted to see a book that was like the books I
learned C and BASIC from in the 1980s; that was the tradition I wanted
to follow in.

**Satish\>\>** Who's the audience for your book -- Beginning Ruby?

**Peter\>\>** I don't mean it to sound like a smartass answer but,
sincerely, beginners! More specifically, it tries to cover three types
of beginner -- people who are new to programming in general, existing
programmers with no OOP or dynamic language experience, and existing
programmers who understand object orientation and dynamic languages but
who don't know Ruby yet. I'd say it aims more toward the first two
types, but Python or C\# programmers, say, wouldn't feel too slowed down
by my book as it's easy to skip the introductions to concepts like
object orientation and relational databases.

**Satish\>\>** The book is now into its second edition. What all has
changed from the 1st edition?

**Peter\>\>** A lot more has changed in the world of Ruby than I
anticipated when taking on the second edition. There have been a lot of
URL and resource changes, as well as some natural library progressions,
such as covering Feedzirra instead of FeedTools. More significantly, the
chapter that was originally devoted to Rails now covers Rails, Sinatra,
and Ramaze, so that some balance is maintained since there are so many
webapp frameworks to choose from in Ruby nowadays. A chapter on GUI
programming (mostly based on Shoes) has been added as some people felt
this was a major area the original edition failed to cover.

**Satish\>\>** What direction do you see Ruby taking in the years to
come?

**Peter\>\>** I think we're at a crucial point in Ruby's life where a
year or two of inactivity and indifference could prompt the start of
Ruby's decline. I'm doing my small part to prevent that from happening,
and hopefully the community and Ruby's developers can keep up with the
exciting developments and game changing ideas to push things forward.

**Satish\>\>** Interesting to note that you added a topic on Sinatra. In
a recent interview with RubyLearning.org, you mentioned that you would
be using Sinatra in more of your projects. Can you give us more details
on this?

**Peter\>\>** I first got into Sinatra late in 2008 when it was already
relatively mature and really enjoyed the small community that had built
up around it. It reminded me a lot of Rails in late 2004. In Sinatra's
favor, though, was a severely reduced amount of "magic" compared to
similar systems, and I loved the way you could write stuff in a very
"Rubyish" from-the-ground-up style. Rails isn't totally flexible but its
opinions can get in the way if you disagree with them -- the gung-ho dive
into REST, for example, which I'm convinced will be poo-pooed in a
couple of years much as XHTML has been lately.

All that said, recently I've become unconvinced of Sinatra's abilities
to scale to large projects. It's not its designated use case, and while
it's possible, I'm not sure I'd want to deal with the mess. Rails 3
still seems like vaporware to me but if it delivers on its main promises
of flexibility in terms of ORMs, JavaScript libraries, and so forth, I
could find myself strongly drawn back into the Rails fold.

*Thank you Peter. In case you have any queries and/or questions, kindly
post your questions here (as comments to this blog post) and Peter would
be glad to answer.*
