---
title: "Ruby Re-Awakens Pune in 2006"
author: "Satish Talim"
date: "2007-01-07"
layout: post
categories:
  - news
  - rails
  - ruby
---
In the early part of 2006, in my hometown
[Pune](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pune), everyone would associate Ruby
with ‘[Ratnaraj](http://www.gemsbiz.com/docs/ruby.asp)‘ or “king of
precious stones” as per our ancient language of Sanskrit. Over the year
things have changed, and the Ruby language and its famous framework
Rails are seeing a huge surge of popularity here.<!--more-->

Pune is a city located in the western Indian state of
[Maharashtra](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maharashtra). It is the 7th
largest city in India with a population of 4.5 million, and the second
largest in the state of Maharashtra. It is located roughly 120
kilometres east of [Mumbai](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mumbai) at an
altitude of 560 metres above sea level.

Pune has a reputation for its several esteemed colleges and educational
institutions, a reason why it is called
‘[Oxford](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oxford) of the East’ (or ‘Oxford
of India’). It has a very strong presence of the Automobile sector and
is on its way to consolidate its position as the ‘Detroit of India’ too.
It is also home to many software and IT companies.

A little over one year ago, [Dibya Prakash](http://dibya.wordpress.com/)
and I held the first meeting of the Ruby User Group of Pune –
[PuneRuby](http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/puneruby/). This was
attended by 25 people, mostly Java developers wanting to know more about
this technology. PuneRuby has grown in strength with now over 400
members. [SAP for Business Ltd.](http://sapforbusiness.com/) have been
our main sponsors.

Initially, [Reevik Technologies](http://reevik.com/) was the only
company working with Ruby and Rails. Today, every software company in
Pune has started working in this technology. Big players like
[Thoughtworks](http://www.thoughtworks.co.in/index.html) and [Persistent
Systems](http://www.persistentsys.com/) are some of the prominent
examples.

With the ever growing need of Ruby and Rails personnel in Pune, a move
in the right direction has been taken by
[IIMM](http://www.puneruby.com/blog/?p=104), Pune. From Feb. 2007, IIMM
have introduced Ruby and Rails for all their IT related courses.

At the beginning of the year, none of the books on Ruby and Rails were
available in Pune. Today, the [Indian
reprints](http://www.puneruby.com/blog/?p=102) of all these books are
immediately available.

On a personal note, I had the good fortune to meet and talk to many
[Ruby Gurus](http://sitekreator.com/satishtalim/ruby_gurus.html) around
the world via my interviews for PuneRuby. With their encouragement I
published my [Ruby Study Notes](http://rubylearning.com/), which finds
mention on the [Ruby Official
site](http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/documentation/). Recently, Dibya
Prakash and I are in the process of forming our own software company –
[OsconLab](http://osconlab.com/) (Open Source Consulting Lab).

Ruby is poised for growth and in the coming years you would hear a lot
from the Rubyists in Pune.

Technorati Tags: [India](http://technorati.com/tag/India),
[Pune](http://technorati.com/tag/Pune),
[Ruby](http://technorati.com/tag/Ruby)
