---
draft: false
title: How to Learn Ruby (or any programming language)
date: 2010-09-20
Hide OgTags:
- 0
Hide SexyBookmarks:
- 0
author: Geoffrey Grosenbach
categories:
- Beginners
- Ruby
- Ruby Masters
layout: post
permalink: /2010/09/20/how-to-learn-ruby-or-any-programming-language/
tags:
- Geoffrey Grosenbach
- programming
- Ruby
---

This guest post is contributed by **[Geoffrey
Grosenbach](https://topfunky.backpackit.com/pub/846300-conference-bio)**,
who designs, produces, and publishes the acclaimed<!--more--> [PeepCode
Screencasts](http://peepcode.com/) for web developers and alpha geeks.
PeepCode publishes cutting edge training videos on jQuery, Git, Ruby on
Rails, RSpec, and iPhone development.

![Geoffrey
Grosenbach](http://rubylearning.com/images/geoffrey_grosenbach.jpg "Geoffrey Grosenbach")

## How to Learn Ruby (or any programming language)

The first programming language I learned was BASIC. Not Visual Basic or
Real Basic but plain BASIC -- line numbers, GOTO, and all.

But it wasn't just my first programming language, it was also my first
experience at programming, period. We learned from recipe cards that
introduced one aspect of the language and then asked us to write a
program (which happened to need the keyword or technique that was just
introduced).

At the age of 10, I remember staring at some of the cards with
absolutely no idea where to begin. I didn't have any of the thinking
tools that I do now: breaking a problem into smaller parts, rephrasing a
problem from the perspective of the user, building a list of
expectations.

On the other hand, the problems were small and most could be solved
within a single technological epiphany. The best lesson I learned was
one I still use everyday: most problems can't be solved in a single
5-minute session of thinking (which happened to be the length of my
attention span at that time). I've since learned new skills and thought
of creative solutions to problems by noodling over them from many angles
and sometimes over quite long periods of time.

Learning Ruby is no different. Here are three angles from which to
contemplate Ruby.

## Code

Now that I've learned the core principles of programming (variables,
loops, methods), I start learning any new programming language by
comparing the new syntax to other languages that I know.

How are variables set? How do I define and call a method? Do lines of
code end in a semicolon or without? The bare basics.

Sometimes I find it easiest to just look at a few pages of existing code
and try to figure it out. But this can be dangerous! Things that look
familiar may have unexpected nuances. As soon as possible, try out your
suspicions by writing a few lines of code to see if it works as you
expect. Ruby comes with `irb` (an interactive console) but saving code
in a file makes it easier to refer to later or run again.

## Culture

After learning what's possible, I try to learn how the language is
actually used by those who know and love the language.

When I first learned to use the Git source code control system, I was
able to do everything I needed. But I soon learned that I was doing it
in the wrong way. After talking to someone who uses it every day, I
discovered that there were much easier ways to accomplish common tasks.

Ruby developers mostly stick to a similar aesthetic: use underscores for
variable and method names, but camel case for class names. Indent with
two spaces. Use underscores for file names (even if it contains a class
that is camel cased).

Higher-level code strategy gets more complicated. Many Ruby developers
prefer the "no code is faster than no code" approach. Write code that
covers the most likely scenarios (and error conditions) rather than
importing libraries with dozens of methods that will never be used.

Others prefer a more full-featured, full stack approach where everything
they need is already available in a framework (but may include tens of
thousands of lines of unused code).

Understand both philosophies and use the one that's most appropriate for
the current task. If you know many developers who use Rails, find others
who use it rarely and learn from them about other possible ways to
organize your code.

## Creativity

Once I've learned the syntax and culture of an unfamiliar programming
language, I test my new knowledge on a fresh project. This is your
chance to combine technical knowledge with a fresh perspective in order
to produce a creative outcome.

Although most programming languages can accomplish the same tasks, each
has its own differences that make some problems easier than others.

Ruby's blocks are hard to recreate in Python and are used differently
than JavaScript functions. Learn to use `yield`, `call`, and the various
code evaluation techniques.

Don't limit your creativity by the code you see other people write. Have
your own ideas. Explore new styles and techniques. This is how
advancements in computer science are made.

## Conclusion

There are many resources available for learning Ruby. But your most
important resource is your mind. The approach you take when learning
Ruby will affect not only the speed at which you learn, but the ideas
you think of and the programs that you write. If you are serious about
learning Ruby or any other programming language, think about obtaining
an information technology degree from a college or university.

***Post supported by 1st Easy Limited*:** 1st Easy Limited offer [UK
based Ruby on Rails hosting](http://www.1steasy.com/ruby-on-rails.htm)
running on a Phusion Passengerâ„¢ and LAMP stack. If you want to get to
know us first, or simply want to try out your Rails or Sinatra skills,
[let us arrange a free trial hosting
account](http://www.1steasy.com/ruby-on-rails.htm#try) for you --
friendly technical support from our team is included!
