---
title: "Startups.in Interview"
author: "Satish Talim"
date: "2007-04-29"
layout: post
categories:
  - news
  - rails
  - ruby
---
Nag. B is the brain behind **[Startups.in](http://startups.in/)**.
Startups.in simplifies the establishment of startups through a
collaborative approach that is a win-win situation to all the involved
members. I’ve invited Nag to share some of his experiences in this
interview.
<!--more-->

* * * * *

[![Nag.
B](http://startups.in/India/images/nag.png)](http://startups.in/India/images/nag.png "Nag. B")

**Could you tell us something about yourself – your background, where
you are based…?**

Satish, thank you very much for your interest in
[Startups.in](http://startups.in/) and I appreciate you taking time in
featuring us on your highly regarded site.

So far, I’m yet another Indian currently based in US. I work for a
company that provides offerings to create the Internet solutions and
enables people to make powerful connections.

Personally, I also have a deep passion and a strong fascination about
startups and entrepreneurship and
[Startups.in/India](http://startups.in/India) is an outlet to share
these interests with others.

**Could you tell us a little more about Startups.in?**

As with any other venture it all started with an idea. In this case, the
idea was to bring to fore the spirit of entrepreneurship in India and
provide a common platform to connect startups, more specifically,
startups in India. [Startups.in/India](http://startups.in/India) is the
first step towards realizing that idea.

The venture has been active for less than an year now and the focus so
far has been to feature startups in India with two primary goals -

-   help spread the word out to the world about the startups in India
    and
-   help the future entrepreneurs learn from the experiences of the
    seasoned entrepreneurs.

Based on the feedback being received and looking at the way
Startups.in/India is molding itself, I believe we are on the right track
to meet our goals.

[Startups.in](http://startups.in/) is a central site that binds all
other value add-in applications and other sites like:

-   [Startups.in/Jobs](http://jobs.startups.in/) – a free job posting
    site
-   [Startups.in/Videos](http://videos.startups.in/) – a collection of
    educational videos highlighting entrepreneurship and technology
    etc., in addition to others.

**Why did you decide to use Ruby on Rails (RoR) for this site?**

As any other web based project developer, I too would prefer a framework
that would allow us to churn better software which is easy to maintain
with a quick turnaround time. I believe any framework that can meet
these requirements would not only be a efficient choice but would also
be “cost effective” for bootstrapped startups.

While I’m not an authority on web application frameworks, I’ve been
keenly following the discussions on various websites and RoR seems to
fit my requirements very well.

Again, this is coming from some one who did not have a first hand
experience at RoR and I therefore have started seeking expert advice
from well respected professionals like you who have been in this
Industry for a long time.

**What’s your impression about the RoR scene in India?**

I will not claim much expertise here but from whatever I’ve been reading
and following through the media, RoR as a whole still has a long to way
before it goes mainstream and experiences a higher adoption rate. As far
as RoR scene in India is concerned, the “scene” is still in its “opening
act” and the “rail” is yet to pick up the “steam”.

But given its obvious advantages and with efforts from evangelists like
you, I’m sure RoR will be on the express track very soon across India
with **Pune** as its hub.

**What are your future plans for Startups.in?**

More than highlighting the products/services,
[Startups.in/India](http://startups.in/India) is about entrepreneurship
and the entrepreneurial spirit behind these startups in India. In my
personal opinion what really deserves a focus is not just the startups
but the passionate entrepreneurs driving them.

While we will continue to drive
[Startups.in/India](http://startups.in/India) with that focus, we will
also continue to explore, innovate and offer better ways to help
startups. [Startu.ps](http://startu.ps/) will be our launch pad.

Thanks once again for the opportunity, Satish.

* * * * *

**Information**

There are many sites and blogs that conduct free [hosting
reviews](http://www.thehostplanet.com/reviews/reviews.html). If you are
interested in getting you own [domain
name](http://www.registeranydomain.com) you should take a look at these
reviews. Also there are many things to consider while getting a hosting
plan. Like many hosting companies offer free services along with their
hosting plans e.g. [affiliate
marketing](http://www.performanceppc.com/Affiliate-Marketing/), web
templates, [search engine
submission](http://www.1-hit.com/free-search-engine-submit.php) but on
the other side they are not that good at taking backups etc. They are
trying to cover this discrepancy by offering free services;
[startlogic](http://www.complete-website-hosting.com/review-startlogic.htm)
offers quality web hosting in this context. Also many
[isp](http://www.ispsushi.com) now offer the services of web hosting and
some offer [free wireless internet](http://www.cableunplugged.com) along
with taking hosing plan from them.

* * * * *


Technorati Tags: [Business](http://technorati.com/tag/Business),
[Entrepreneurship](http://technorati.com/tag/Entrepreneurship),
[India](http://technorati.com/tag/India), [Nag.
B](http://technorati.com/tag/Nag.+B),
[Pune](http://technorati.com/tag/Pune),
[Startups.in](http://technorati.com/tag/Startups.in)
