---
draft: false
title: Interview - Michael Morin Creator of Using Twitter with Ruby Course
date: 2009-03-17
author: Satish Talim
authorlink: "http://satishtalim.com"
socialsharing: true
authorgoogleplus: https://plus.google.com/+SatishTalim/about
authorlinkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/satishtalim
authortwitter: http://twitter.com/IndianGuru
authorfacebook: http://www.facebook.com/satishtalim/about
categories:
- Beginners
- Interview
- Ruby
- Twitter
description:
- Using Twitter with Ruby course creator Michael Morin talks to RubyLearning.
keywords:
- Michael Morin,Interviews,Ruby,Twitter,The Ruby Programming Language
layout: post
permalink: /2009/03/17/interview-michael-morin-creator-of-using-twitter-with-ruby-course/
tags:
- interviews
- Michael Morin
- Ruby
- The Ruby Programming Language
- Twitter
---
The first ever *free*, online “**Using Twitter with Ruby**” course
starts 18th April 2009 at
[RubyLearning.org](http://rubylearning.org/class/). Satish Talim of
RubyLearning caught up with **Micheal Morin**, the creator of this
course, and talked to him in this interview.<!--more-->

![Michael Morin,
USA](http://rubylearning.com/images/MichaelMorin.jpg "Michael Morin, USA")

**Satish Talim\>\>** Welcome, Michael and thanks for taking out time to
share your thoughts. For the benefit of the readers, could you tell us
something about your self?

**Michael Morin\>\>** I’ve been hooked on computers my whole life. Ever
since we got our first family computer, a Commodore 64, I’ve simply been
fascinated. I can remember working so hard to copy BASIC programs out of
its instruction book even before I could read. So I guess you could say
I’ve been programming my entire life.

I continued programming ever since. It’s just so much fun, telling that
magical box on your desk exactly what you want it to do. Though I’ve
never worked professionally as a programmer, it’s always been a serious
hobby of mine.

**Satish\>\>** You and Amanda blog at About.com. Tell us something about
this.

**Michael\>\>** I’d been programming in Ruby for a number of years when
Amanda (my sister-in-law) saw an opening at About.com for a Ruby Guide.
It was a natural fit. Get me started about Ruby and I just don’t know
when to stop. All I had to do them was type it up.

Guides are a lot more than bloggers, we try to pack as much information
about our subject into the guide sites. This includes informative
articles as well as timely blog posts.

Our [Guide site](http://ruby.about.com/), tries to provide content for
everyone of all skill levels. We’re also open to suggestions and
requests for all types of content. Everything I write there is for your
benefit.

**Satish\>\>** How did you get involved with Ruby programming?

**Michael\>\>** I like learning programming languages. Sometimes I’ll
learn one for no practical reason, just to see what it’s like and how it
ticks. A few years ago (this must have been in 2003 or 2004, before the
Rails craze), I was looking into pure object oriented languages and
stumbled on Ruby. I hadn’t really heard of it before, but I decided to
take a chance on it. I certainly wasn’t disappointed.

There’s just something about Ruby that clicks. Things make sense, it’s
expressive and the syntax clean. Code is often short and readable, plus
all the object oriented goodness. Moving to Ruby from Perl (my former
language of choice) was a breath of fresh air. I haven’t looked back, or
switched from Ruby since then.

**Satish\>\>** You love the Ruby programming language and Ruby is more
of a hobby to you. Tell us something more about this.

**Michael\>\>** Programming is supposed to be fun. If it’s not fun, it’s
not really worth doing, right? For a while I was into Perl, code golf
(making your programs as short as possible) and all that, but it seemed
like I was spinning my wheels. Perl was just so cryptic and convoluted
and I never really understood it fully. I started to realize I wasn’t
having any fun programming in Perl.

I had a blast programming with Ruby from the first “puts.” Jumping right
into IRB, I was able to type something and immediately see what it did,
just like on my Commodore 64! And once you get over a few gotchas (such
as mixin modules), Ruby is also easy to understand. I just have fun
programming with Ruby and I don’t think I’ll ever stop.

> It’s easy to Twitter-face with Ruby!

**Satish\>\>** You would be conducting a short course at
RubyLearning.org on Using Twitter with Ruby. What are your thoughts on
this and why did you think that such a course would be beneficial to the
Ruby community.

**Michael\>\>** I’d been using Twitter for a while (my username is
[UziMonkey](http://twitter.com/UziMonkey)) and was vaguely aware the API
was open for anyone to use, but it wasn’t until I had an idea for
something that I decided to check it out. I expected something complex,
but what I got was something extremely simple and elegant. I immediately
realized that Twitter is a natural fit to Ruby.

I was up and running in no time, I hadn’t realized that it would have
been so easy to put my script together. Being someone always eager to
share what I know, I thought this would be a useful skill for all Ruby
programmers.

This course isn’t just about Twitter though. You’ll learn about HTTP,
parsing XML, and how to consume web services in general. You can take
what you learn in this course and interface with many other sites that
provide APIs. It’s just something that should be in everyone’s toolbox,
and was missing from mine for quite a while.

**Satish\>\>** Do you have any suggestions for RubyLearningâ€™s
â€?[Using Twitter with
Ruby](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2009/03/13/new-course-using-twitter-with-ruby/)â€?
course participants?

**Michael\>\>** Never assume anything is difficult. I kept thinking
working with Twitter was going to be difficult, and at first it was, at
least a little. But everything is always simpler than you make it out to
be, and if you keep thinking everything is difficult, you’re going to
miss out on some great stuff.

**Satish\>\>** Thanks Michael for sharing your views with the “**Using
Twitter with Ruby**” course participants.

***Disclaimer:***\
*The opinions expressed are those of Michael Morin and do not
necessarily reflect those of
**[RubyLearning.org](http://rubylearning.org/)**.*

