---
draft: false
title: ROR based websites made by Indian companies
date: 2010-07-18
author: Satish Talim
authorlink: "http://satishtalim.com"
socialsharing: true
authorgoogleplus: https://plus.google.com/+SatishTalim/about
authorlinkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/satishtalim
authortwitter: http://twitter.com/IndianGuru
authorfacebook: https://www.facebook.com/satishtalim/about
categories:
- Ruby
- Ruby on Rails
layout: post
permalink: /2010/07/18/ror-based-websites-made-by-indian-companies/
tags:
- india
- Ruby
- Ruby on Rails
---
As a sequel to my post [Indian Ruby on Rails
Portfolio](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2010/02/08/indian-ruby-on-rails-portfolio/),
I am compiling a list (in alphabetical order of company names)
showcasing **ROR based websites made by Indian companies**.

I’ll be updating this page from time to time. If you are the owner /
developer of such a website(s), then I would appreciate if you would
send me by email (**satish [dot] talim [at] gmail.com**), as much
information about the same. Namely:

1.  Name and location of the Indian company making the ROR based
    websites.
2.  Name and the URL of the ROR based website(s).
3.  4-5 line details about this website(s) that includes what the
    site(s) is about.
4.  The year the website(s) was created.
5.  The contact person’s name and email id.

## ROR based websites made by Indian companies

### Anil Wadghule, Pune

**[Planet Ruby on Rails](http://planetrubyonrails.net/)** is a RSS/Atom
feed aggregator. It displays posts of top Ruby on Rails blogs and
related technology blogs. The differentiating features are:

-   you can navigate site using keyboard shortcuts like J, K, H, L, S.
-   You can search within the site.
-   You also get an aggregated feed of this site (50+ subscribers of the
    feed).
-   You can subscribe to the feed and you will get all the posts in a
    feed without subscribing to individual sites feed.
-   Site’s interface is clean and designed for easier readability.

There are other similar Planet Sites with .com and .org domains. But the
main difference is
[planetrubyonrails.net](http://planetrubyonrails.net/) is open source
and the code is available at
[Github](http://github.com/anildigital/planet). You can contribute to it
to make it better.

The first commit was made on 2008-05-25. The site is live from that
date. The site was coded by [Anil
Wadghule](mailto:anil@digitalcodes.org) and he seeks contributors to it.
It will always be free and ad-free.

* * * * *

### BubbleIdeas, Delhi

**[BubbleIdeas](http://bubbleideas.com/)** helps organizations and
leaders figure out most socially engaging ideas from the rest. The tool
finds great use for Enterprise 2.0 and Government 2.0 where it is
challenging to pull out signal from the noise of conversations happening
between customers or citizens. The top most conversations are actionable
insights on which management or leaders can take actions. Example:
[http://talktoht.com/home](http://talktoht.com/home)

The site was created in 2010 and the contact person is [Arvind
Nigam](mailto:arvind@bubbleideas.com).

* * * * *

### Crypsis Technologies, Gurgaon

**[4moles](http://4moles.com/)** is Asia’s 1st golfing community and
user-generated content website. 4moles.com is a brand subsidary of
Goldfish Information Technologies (P) Ltd. Promoted by keen golfer and
entrepreneur Dinesh C. Thakur and with friends from the golfing
community, the site aspires to be a “One-Stop Shop” for all desires of
an Asian golfer. With 15000+ members on 4moles.com in less than 1 year,
the growth has just begun. Dinesh Thakur, is a keen golfer and an
entrepreneur who has had an opportunity to be part of the IT and Telecom
revolution in India in the early 90’s. Dinesh is an alumni of The
Scindia School, and a management graduate from Symbiosis Institute of
Management Studies (Pune). He has over 14 years of extensive experience
working with teams and setting up Telecom ventures and new business
initiatives in the field of Telecom and IT. He brings knowledge and
experience from companies like Hutchinson, Bharti Group and Escorts
Group.

The site was developed by [Crypsis Technologies](http://crypsis.net/)
Gurgaon/HYD and the contact person is [Shyam
Mohan](mailto:shyammohankanojia@gmail.com).

* * * * *

### Foradian Technologies, Mangalore

**[Fedena](http://www.fedena.com/)** is the first open source school
management system based on Ruby on Rails. It was initially developed by
a team of developers at Foradian Technologies. The project was made open
source by Foradian, and is now maintained by the open source community.
With Fedena, they hope to be able to provide an easy solution to schools
and colleges to manage their activities online. Fedena has many
different fetures such as student database management, timetable,
attendance and examination results management, and also human resources
and finance management.

The site was created in 2009. The contact person is [Arvind
GS](mailto:arvind@foradian.com).

**[Unity Peace](http://unitypeace.com/)** is a Time Management and Daily
planner application for attaining peace.

The contact person is [Dr Habeeb Rahman](mailto:habeeb@unitypeace.com).

* * * * *

### HirePlug, Pune

**[HirePlug](http://www.hireplug.com/)** is a Social Hiring portal.
Their goal is to make hiring fast, effective and fun. Job Boards
seriously lack top talent. The same talent is available on the Social
Networks and is untapped. The idea revolves around providing a unified
platform for Talent Management, Job Board and leveraging social networks
for hiring the top talent by means of referral hiring.

The site was created in 2009 and the contact person is [Rajan
Chandi](mailto:chandi.rajan@gmail.com).

* * * * *

### Josh Software Pvt. Ltd., Pune

**[Samhita.org](http://www.samhita.org/)** is a Social Venture that
brings about collaboration between Social Organizations, People and
Service Providers.

This portal has been entirely developed by Josh Software and is hosted
on EngineYard AppCloud. This uses nginx, passenger and memcache. It
caters to integration with other portals. This is one of the first
philanthropic involvements of Josh and its close to their heart! They
hope to make a difference in their own way using this as a platform. The
site was created in 2010.

**[ShowMeTV](http://www.showme.tv/)** is a gaming site. “A place where
your talent pays”. Showme is a spectacular portal where you can submit
videos of pranks, sports, fashion and win money! You can win money even
by voting.

This is hosted on Rackspace as a 2-node cluster. Videos are encoded to
mp4 using encoding.com and stored on the CloudFiles CDN. The site was
created in 2010.

**[BrandPotion](http://www.brandpotion.com/)**: Along with the domain
expertize of H-Farm and Zooppa from Italy, Josh was involved in the
complete development of BrandPotion.

Create. Connect. Communicate. The three Cs of BrandPotion lie at the
nexus of this site’s functioning. Taking networking beyond the social
realm, this initiative is a logical step towards bridging the gap
between brands and their users. Welcome to brand networking! The site
was created in 2009.

The contact person is [Gautam Rege](mailto:gautam@joshsoftware.com) and
their [ROR development center](http://www.joshsoftware.com/) is in
**Pune**.

* * * * *

### Life Online, Pune

**[iloveread.in](http://iloveread.in/)** is a book lending library in
Chennai and Hyderabad, incubated and based out of IIT-Madras. Customers
can register on the site for free (with their email id) and browse our
collection. They can select a membership plan, pay through their
internet gateway (or by cash) and order books online. The books are
delivered to their house at no extra cost. They also provide
recommendations to their users (especially for school kids) and popular
lists of award winning books. iloveread.in also has tie-ups with schools
in Chennai and employs trained professionals to organize story telling
and book reading sessions, alternative endings and various other
activities for students.

The site has been designed for a clean and smooth browsing experience
with loads of AJAX and ample white spaces to avoid clutter. They plan to
introduce a host of other features such as SMS and Gtalk based search
and ordering, use of Adobe Flex for a richer browsing experience,
multi-lingual support for Indian languages and also a very basic HTML
version of the site for slow internet connections.

The contact person is [Sahil Gore](mailto:sahilgore@gmail.com). The site
was created in 2009.

* * * * *

### UnitedProsperity, Chennai

**[UnitedProsperity](http://www.unitedprosperity.org/)** is a non-profit
organization that helps you **combat extreme global poverty** powerfully
by **multiplying the impact of your money** through loan guarantees. It
is the world’s first social guaranteeing website.

The site was created in 2009. The contact person is [Bhalchander
Vishwanath](mailto:contactus@unitedprosperity.org).

* * * * *

### Vinsol, Delhi

**[Blellow](http://www.blellow.com/)** is a San Antonio based
bootstrapped start-up. Blellow is a social network for web design and
technology professionals that encourages open collaboration and the
sharing of knowledge. It is also a marketplace of projects. Blellow is a
community with a focus on productivity. It’s a place for freelancers and
professionals to collaborate, find work, and solve problems. Blellow is
organized into groups based on interests, and anybody can join the
conversation. The site was created in 2009.

**[Lilgrams](http://lilgrams.com/)** is a baby book for parents to
capture precious moments and share it with their loved ones. The site
was created in 2009.

**[Lovebase](http://www.lovebase.com/)** (formerly Alarena) is the
largest online dating service in Africa that allows you to find your
ideal romantic match and connect with them. Lovebase is enhanced with
many new features that improves the experience of all their members –
search, wink and flirt, chat, see who looked at one’s profile, and many
other features are now available. Vinsol provided Ruby on Rails
consulting to this site. The site was created in 2010.

**[Lovetastic](http://lovetastic.com/)** is a leading social network in
the world for gay men. Vinsol still maintain the site, tweaking features
and fixing random things. The site was created in 2008.

**[ofri](http://www.ofri.ch/)** is an online marketplace for quotes,
target to the niche market of handymen and craftsmen in Switzerland.
Users can post their job description for free on ofri.ch, and interested
handymen can submit their quotes for the job. Then, the user can compare
the received quotes and choose the one he likes. After the job is done,
the user can rate the handyman (and vice versa). The business model is
transaction based, i.e. if the quote of an handyman was successful, the
handyman pays 4% of the corresponding quote amount. First prototype was
online on August 2009. The current website and upcoming features are
completely developed by [Vinsol](http://vinsol.com/).

**[Scrumbuy](http://www.scrumbuy.com/)** is UK’s first group shopping
portal. Currently targeting London, this portal offer exclusive deals to
group of customers while creating new markets and sales channels for
local businesses. The site was created in 2009.

The contact person is [Manik Juneja](mailto:manik@vinsol.com).

* * * * *
