---
title: 'Interview: Karmen Blake'
author: Satish Talim
date: "2007-10-03"
layout: post
permalink: /2007/10/03/interview-karmen-blake/
categories:
  - interview
  - ruby
  - training
---
[![Karmen
Blake](http://rubylearning.com/images/karmen.jpg)](http://rubylearning.com/images/karmen.jpg "Karmen Blake")

(This interview appeared before on 23rd Sept. 2006 on the PuneRuby
blog).

Today we talk to **Karmen Blake**, a Ruby/Rails teacher at [Spokane
Community
College](http://webdev.scc.spokane.edu:3000/2007/10/2/cis-282).

**Satish Talim\>\>** Hello Karmen and welcome. Could you tell us
something about yourself – your background; where you are based…?

**Karmen Blake\>\>** I teach in Spokane, WA at Spokane Community
College. I went to Eastern Washington University right out of high
school. I have a bachelors in Computer Science and Education (quite a
combination, eh) and a masters in Technology Education with an emphasis
in distance learning. After graduation I worked for a school district as
a technology coordinator doing everything under the sun: training, web
development, networking, and tech support. I was there for two years
before moving on to the community college. Since being at the community
college I have had the privilege to teach many exciting things such as
XHTML, JavaScript, Cascading Style Sheets, PHP, Java, JEE Web Tier, XML,
MySQL, Ruby and Rails. For the last six years I have worked with many
wonderful companies in town on short term contracts over summer break. I
take that experience back to the classrooms. It is a win-win for the
students and I.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Given the choices out there, why did you select
Ruby?

**Karmen Blake\>\>** It is not that I sat down and did an â€˜eeny,
meeny, miny, mowâ€™ and was stuck with Ruby. After years of priding
myself on using PHP/MySQL and JSP/Servlets, I thought what else would I
need for web development. Even though PHP and JSPs have their quirks, I
worked through them and was proud of the things I could do with what I
had in those platforms. The day I started reading the â€˜pickaxeâ€™
everything changed.

**Satish Talim\>\>** How did you learn Ruby and when?

**Karmen Blake\>\>** I was headed to a conference March of â€˜04 in a
plane ride from Seattle, WA to Orlando, Fl and just a few days before
this, I received my copy of the â€˜pickaxeâ€™. Great timing for me to
crack open this book and dive into Ruby on this plane trip. I started
reading and was immediately impressed. I was so impressed I could not
put the book down. I had read most of it by the time I got to Orlando.
On the way back from the conference I re-read a majority of the book and
skimmed parts I missed earlier.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Which features of Ruby do you like the most?

**Karmen Blake\>\>** As a teacher and having taught many different
languages I compare Ruby to these languages that I knew. In particular I
compare Ruby to Java. I taught a 3 quarter sequence in Java and so any
language I learn I use Java as a litmus test. I love that in Ruby things
are by default intuitive and natural (I know this sounds a little vague
but for those who have used Ruby you know what Iâ€™m talking about). It
just feels good. I love dynamically typed variables, everything is an
object, attr\_\* family for classes, meta-programming and DSLs,
iterators, and ruby library in general (Iâ€™m constantly amazed how
Iâ€™ll find methods for exactly what I need).

**Satish Talim\>\>** Do you think Ruby has the potential to be a
mainstream programming language?

**Karmen Blake\>\>** Will Ruby be a mainstream language? I donâ€™t know.
I believe it has the potential to be a mainstream language. My gauge for
â€˜gone mainstreamâ€™ is if it is adopted by computer science
departments. Computer science departments in general are slow adopters
of languages and donâ€™t switch unless a language is either mainstream
or has been mainstream. Fortunately I teach at a community college where
I get to move quicker in relation to the industry. I make many
curriculum changes every year to keep up. Most teachers think Iâ€™m
crazy for keeping up with technology but I think it is exciting! Who
would want to teach the same thing year after year after year for 25-30
years? Not me! As a result, the 3 quarter sequence that I used to teach
in Java – Drum roll, please – I use Ruby now. More recently Iâ€™ve added
another class to the mix so I teach a total of 3 Ruby classes and a
Rails class. That is now 4 classes that involve Ruby. How cool is
that?!!

**Satish Talim\>\>** What applications, utilities have you developed in
Ruby and what platform are you running these applications on?

**Karmen Blake\>\>** I use my instructor website as my Rails sandbox. I
try new things on it first. Starting this last summer and currently I am
consulting using Rails. Iâ€™m pushing Rails into places where Java/JEE
used to reside. As a result I have had to do some integration work using
Ruby, Java, and XML. In my consulting work I use a Mac and at the
college I use Ubuntu. Last year I presented Ruby and Rails at the
[Course Technology
Conference](http://www.course.com/events/conference2006/2006pres/agile-webdev-ruby.cfm)
and it went over well. Iâ€™m trying to do my part in education to push
Ruby and Rails to a mostly .NET and PHP crowd.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Anything else you would like to share with us?

**Karmen Blake\>\>** Thanks for giving me this opportunity to share and
inspire others.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Thanks Karmen for sharing your views with our
members.

Technorati Tags: [Interviews](http://technorati.com/tag/Interviews),
[Interview: Karmen
Blake](http://technorati.com/tag/Interview%3A+Karmen+Blake), [Karmen
Blake](http://technorati.com/tag/Karmen+Blake),
[Ruby](http://technorati.com/tag/Ruby), [Ruby
Interviews](http://technorati.com/tag/Ruby+Interviews)
