---
author: Satish Talim
categories:
- news
- rails
- ruby
date: 2007-05-04
layout: post
title: ThinkDRY Interview
---

**Vincent Spehner** heads the company
[ThinkDRY](http://www.thinkdry.com/), based in Pune. Recently, I had a
chance to talk to him and requested him to share some of his
experiences. Here goes.    <!--more-->
* * * * *

<img src="http://rubylearning.com/images/vincent_spehner.jpg" height=144>
<br/>Vincent Spehner</img> 

**Could you tell us something about yourself â€“ your background, where
you are based?**

I come from Marseille in the south of France and I am a University
Engineer specialized in Sciences, Computer Sciences and Artificial
Intelligence. I am still studing Philosophia through an e-learning
program of the University of Provence.

**Could you tell us a little more about ThinkDRY?**

ThinkDRY is a small but fast growing WEB 2.0 Engineering company. We are
mainly working using Rails framework and Ajax. We also have skills on
Flash, if the customer asks for. We are actually 6 and plan to hire 5
others RoR experts by the end of the year.

All our customers are from France. They ask for a French speaking
contact and contract under French laws because they dont trust
outsourced plateforms. That is what we offer.

**Why did you choose Ruby on Rails (RoR) as a framework for ThinkDRY?**

I discovered Ruby on Rails, eight months ago for a R&D personnal
project. I have been using PHP last five years, but when you see how
simple it is to make a basic DB application using Rails, you give up on
PHP for sure!

**Were there any surprises in working with RoR?**

Yes. The community is very active but not well structured, in my point
of view. Information is available but sometimes very difficult to find.
You have to scroll many forums to find the tips you were looking for.
Furthermore, there is no real documentation on line.

**You have an off shore development center in Pune. What is your
impression about the RoR scene in India?**

I have worked with many Freelancers here. The main thing I can say is:
they are not reliable at all. Amazing!! They always have a good reason
for not finishing the work. Just two of them were really efficient. We
are still working together. Concerning the RoR scene in India: I dont
know it very well. I spend all my week working for ThinkDRY. You know
that in a startup it is 70 hours of work per week!

**What advice would you give startups about platform choices?**

For a classic Web Application (95% of modern web site) use Ruby on Rails
without hesitation. But if you are thinking about some very tricky
stuff, may be PHP is still a good solution.

**Getting back to ThinkDRY, what are your future plans?**

We should deliver our third project during the next few months and two
other projects are already in the pipe. We simply plan to conquer the
European Market with the help of our numerous contacts in Germany,
England and France. For this purpose we are in the process of opening a
French office. Another one will be open next year, in Germany.

Technorati Tags: [France](http://technorati.com/tag/France),
[India](http://technorati.com/tag/India),
[Pune](http://technorati.com/tag/Pune),
[ThinkDRY](http://technorati.com/tag/ThinkDRY), [Vincent
Spehner](http://technorati.com/tag/Vincent+Spehner)
