---
title: "Advice For Ruby Beginners 3"
author: "Satish Talim"
date: "2007-10-04"
layout: post
categories:
  - beginners
  - interview
  - popular
  - rails
  - ruby
  - training
---
This is part 3 in our [ongoing
conversation](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2007/09/27/advice-for-ruby-beginners-1/)
– “**Advice For Ruby Beginners**“.<!--more-->

* * * * *

**Satish\>\> What opportunities exist in your country for Ruby freshers;
people who know Core Ruby thoroughly?**

**Agnieszka (Poland)\>\>** Companies that use Ruby and RoR are mostly
happy to hire both Ruby experts and beginners. Those are usually small
companies, some of them with a very agile spirit. Larger companies are
mostly too conservative to adopt this technology and I don’t expect it
to change soon. Now and then somebody is looking for programmers to join
a startup, also investors from abroad seek Polish coders. It seems that
demand for Ruby skills is on the rise and it is likely that soon
companies will be looking for training from Ruby experts.

**Fabio (Brazil)\>\>** As I said before, big companies will not get into
the Ruby or Rails business for the time being. I’ve been a consultant
for this kind of corporations for the last 5 years and I already
recognize their vices. We are also not used to have hundreds of
startups, because we don’t have as many investors as in the USA. So it
is very hard to start a small company here. But there are thousands of
medium-class businesses that don’t care about brand: they care to have
their work done with quality and within reasonable costs. That’s the
market that Rails programmers will serve. As 37signals said: we don’t
need to target just the Fortune 500, we have to look after the Fortune
5,000. There’s no free lunch though: most younger programmers care about
having stable jobs, not playing with their favorite technologies. They
don’t study because they like, but because they need the credentials to
get in big companies. The kind of professionals that will try Rails,
will be necessarily outside of this status quo. At least for now.
Ruby/Rails developers all have an entrepreneurship spirit. They are not
plain reckless, but they enjoy taking some risks. That’s people that can
see what has the potential to eventually become ‘the next big thing’. We
like to be independent, we don’t like tedious jobs, boring tasks, and
annoying co-workers. We want to stay ahead of the competition. We are
not afraid of new things, we are not afraid of becoming obsolete, we are
not concerned of last year’s certifications getting old. We don’t care
about having fancy business cards and using brand new ties. Current
Ruby/Rails developers are the kind of people that push the whole market
forward. We think different. This is not a mass market yet, so if you
want the easy route, I can’t recommend this, otherwise you are very
welcome. Bottom line is: there’s not an established market ready to
welcome new Ruby or Rails developers, yet. You’ll have to dig further on
your own. If you want to start your own company, this is a great tool to
get the job done. And this is a globalized world, we can’t be limited by
our own territorial boundaries. There’s plenty of jobs available in
other countries and many are willing to have offshore outsourced
resources. Brazil is very very compelling as an outsourcing shop. We are
cheaper because of the current dollar exchange rate. A good opportunity
to start working for foreign companies.

**Jamie (UK)\>\>** Well mostly you’re looking at sysadmin work, web
development work, and maybe glue code work.

**Jamis (USA)\>\>** There are a lot of job opportunities for people with
Rails experience. If you want to do more general work with Ruby, your
options are more limited, but I found that even in my previous job
(where I did Java all day) I was able to use Ruby for various tasks,
like code generation and system administration. Opportunities are where
you make them!

**Jens (Switzerland)\>\>** I guess most of the companies that use Ruby
in Switzerland would be looking for people that know Ruby. I know I do –
I could use someone with Ruby skills immediately. I’m not sure about the
large companies, the banks, the insurance companies. From what I hear,
they are still very much “traditional” shops (Java, dot Net) and haven’t
made the switch yet to the agile scripting languages. I guess they will
turn around, when for example JRuby becomes more mature.

**Juanjo (Spain)\>\>** Thanks to Rails there is a good demand for
web-developers. As far as I know, if you are a good Ruby/RoR programmer,
you can easily find a job in Spain. And I think soon, the big companies
will start using Ruby and some colleges will start teaching Ruby so this
is just the beginning.

**Julian (Netherlands)\>\>** I did talk about this in my previous reply.

**Manik (India)\>\>** As I mentioned in my last answer, there is a
strong and growing demand for Ruby and Rails developers in India. There
are a lot of consultant companies doing Rails development. There are a
lot of product companies developing products on Rails and Ruby. If you
know of some really good developers, could you ask them to send their
resumes to me
![;-)](http://rubylearning.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_wink.gif)

**Matt (Australia)\>\>** There’s not a lot of call for pure Ruby
developers, like there is for (say) Java developers. Mostly it’s “we
want a sysadmin who scripts in Ruby” or developing in Rails.

**Mislav (Croatia)\>\>** A quick search for “ruby” on several popular
job boards here didn’t yield anything. But I guess that companies are
starting to get interested even here and that we will soon see an
increase in job demand. There is always an option for freelancing in the
meantime. There are also opportunities to be employed remotely in a
company that might be far from you, even in the US. Hey – it’s the
Internet
![:)](http://rubylearning.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_smile.gif)

**Ola (Sweden)\>\>** I think the time is ripe to get the larger
companies of Sweden to accept Ruby and Rails. Most of them haven’t yet,
but most of them are also forward thinking, innovative and not as
conservative as similar companies in other countries. I would say that
spreading the message and teaching Ruby can definitely be done in Sweden
right now.

**Pedro (Portugal)\>\>** I think in Portugal, the same thing applies to
Ruby as for other Languages, the market is booming and for anyone
dominating Ruby, work isn’t really going to be a problem. The market is
actually lacking good programmers at all levels.

**Peter (UK)\>\>** In terms of job opportunities, the UK does better
than most of the world, but pales in comparison to the United States
where there are literally hundreds of jobs available. Ruby and Rails
don’t have considerable mindshare here, and lag a long way behind
technologies such as Java or .NET. I think people tend to make their own
opportunities, though, and if working with Ruby and Rails gets someone
excited enough to start their own Web site or consultancy business,
there’s the opportunity to make money wherever you are.

**Remco (Netherlands)\>\>** There’s a lot of demand for computer
specialists in the Netherlands and in the recent year this includes Ruby
programmers. Rails has spawned a lot of companies in the Netherlands
too. They are successfully competing which more established web
application builders and a lot of these latter companies are switching
there web development to Rails. No matter where you are, if web
development is your trade, you should learn about Ruby and Ruby on Rails
or stick with your stuff and join the ranks of Cobol programmers.

**Sau (Singapore)\>\>** Ruby is used professionally in an increasing
number of small startups and consulting companies in Singapore. There
are many job openings available and often posted up in the SRB Google
Group.

**Satish\>\> Any other suggestions for these participants (would-be Ruby
developers)?**

**Agnieszka (Poland)\>\>** Get down to work and never stop improving
your skills. Develop an addiction to coding standards and automated
testing. Take as much as possible from the real and virtual community,
but don’t forget to give back – publish code, help answer other people’s
questions, participate in events. Take your time to try out other
languages, make sure you know why Ruby is your language of choice.

**Fabio (Brazil)\>\>** My recommendations usually go beyond a particular
technology. Of course, the Big Thing of the hour is definitely Ruby on
Rails. It is rising very fast, it’s being matured, the community is
exponentially growing, tools are being refined. The market is just
starting to pay attention. We have to stay updated by the minute. Learn
more. Learn beyond one tool or one language. There’s been Language-Wars,
Frameworks-Wars in the past, there’s been some recently. It happens not
because people actually ‘like’ their old technology, but because they
can’t see ahead of their noses. They are ‘afraid’ of being wrong, of
change. Career people don’t like changing. They want to stay in a solid
and very predictive route, a very smooth ride up the mountain slope.
That’s not the reality: things eventually change. Technology changes
even faster. It’s changing right now and just closing your eyes will not
modify this very fact. Other people think that learning things that they
can’t immediately use is waste of resources, which is not true.
Education is an investment. You can only recognize its value once you
need it, not before.

**Jamie (UK)\>\>** Get public with your findings, blog heavily, get
known. The Ruby community is a small world, and it’s easy to spot the
talented folk at a distance with a little google and a few
recommendations.

**Jamis (USA)\>\>** Be passionate! If you’re only learning Ruby as a
resume item, you’re doomed to fail, simply because the Ruby/Rails
landscape is full of passionate programmers who will always out-perform
and out-resume you. If you are truly passionate about Ruby, that passion
will shine through. Be prolific! Write code. Write \_lots\_ of code. And
don’t be afraid to throw away most of it. Just as a writer learns to
write by writing, so a programmer learns to program by programming. Be
social! Find (or found!) an open-source project that appeals to you, and
start looking for ways to contribute to it. Nothing pushes your skills
so much as having other experienced programmers that can review and
critique your code, and that’s what happens when you submit a patch to a
project.

**Jens (Switzerland)\>\>** Enjoy programming. Have fun. Ruby helps you
with that. Get involved in the local community. And be open about
languages. Ruby is but one of the many fine programming languages out
there.

**Juanjo (Spain)\>\>** Write code. Try new things. Learn from others and
help other people to learn. Ruby community is a small and nice one, so
be a part of it and participate.

**Julian (Netherlands)\>\>** Use Ruby to break out of the old technology
you have been using before. Try all the weird quirky things in it that
are new to you (like meta-programming, continuations, exceptions, base
class extensions) to know it better. If you have been doing languages
like PHP before (this primarily applies to web developers) – take this
opportunity to learn how to deploy in the real world, without the warm
fuzzy feeling of an admin-tuned restricted copy of mod\_php that will
just destroy your program after the page is sent off. And read lots of
source written by others, ultimately. Refactor and unit test
mercilessly, because otherwise you might have been much better off doing
Perl. And do not get too stuck in the Rails world – there’s more to Ruby
than just Rails, and there are some pragmatic decisions made by David
that might limit your approach to the language.

**Manik (India)\>\>**\
 a. Strengthen the basics.\
 b. Write a lot of code.\
 c. Read though lots of existing open source applications including
Rails.\
 d. Read a lot of blogs and stay on top of what is new and happening.\
 e. Try to form or join developer communities and participate in
developer community events, with the aim of sharing and learning.\
 f. Release code to open source, because that makes you think if there
is a better way of writing the same code. You would of course want to
share your best code with the world! That being said, don’t wait forever
to get the code in the best shape to release. Release and clearly
mention the known issues.

**Matt (Australia)\>\>** Program early and program often.

**Mislav (Croatia)\>\>** Embrace good practices early and solve problems
the right way. For instance, unit-testing or BDD (behaviour-driven
development) is something without which most of the things in Ruby/Rails
world would be unthinkable. Ensure clean separation of your modules and
always know which part is responsible for what. Learn how to love the
console (if you are a Windows person). If you will be working with
Rails, use edge Rails (meaning the newest development version) from the
start, because it is soon-to-be Rails 2.0. And, as I’ve already said,
let things challenge you. Programming is not dull and “geeky” anymore;
it’s creative and exciting. If you are from Croatia and need direction,
feel free to [email
me](http://workingwithrails.com/person/2764-mislav-marohni). I’d really
like our community to get stronger. Good luck!

**Ola (Sweden)\>\>** Just to keep digging. Ruby is a lovely language
with depths that can take years to grasp. Just because you don’t
understand a feature doesn’t mean it doesn’t have a use. Most things in
Ruby are there for a reason – so keep looking.

**Pedro (Portugal)\>\>** Join online and local developers communities,
that’s the fastest and easiest way to learn and share knowledge. Why not
use this already existing networks as an advantage point? I think this
would be my most important and humble suggestion.

**Peter (UK)\>\>** It’s easy to become frustrated when you’re working on
some code (even a single line) and it doesn’t do what you expect. Rather
than get frustrated, try to break your code down into the smallest
pieces possible to see where the bug is occurring. Most “bugs”, I’ve
found, tend to come from our own incorrect assumptions about how things
work, rather than errors made by the language or the computer itself. If
you break things down into tiny pieces, you can quickly find out where
things aren’t working as planned and be able to tackle any tricky
debugging situation!

**Remco (Netherlands)\>\>** Make DRY (Don’t Repeat Yourself) one of your
mantras. Avoiding copy-and-pasting trains your Ruby muscles! On the
subject of copying, don’t copy code from others without understanding
it. Proper code isn’t hard to read, don’t be satisfied when it works for
you but you do not know why. And finally remember: there’s no Ruby
nirvana. Every Ruby developer is rediscovering Ruby on a regular basis,
including Matz. People are doing amazing things with this language,
finding new angles to solve problems. Be prepared to keep learning this
language and enjoy the ride.

**David (USA)\>\>** I’ve learned a ton of Ruby by helping other people
learn, and answering questions on mailing lists. Of course you have to
be comfortable with doing this, but it can be very beneficial for you as
well as the people you’re helping. Whenever someone asks a question that
I can’t answer, but think I should be able to, I try to figure it out
and come up with an answer. That way they get an answer, and I learn
something.

**Sau (Singapore)\>\>** Join the community, start the dialog.
Programming with Ruby is fun and there are plenty of people who are
willing to extend a helping hand. For any queries, feel free to discuss
with me personally. Send me an Email at:
cssheong[at]pacific[dot]net[dot]sg

* * * * *

**Satish\>\> *It has been fun interacting with you all and thank you for
sharing your views with the RubyLearning.com members.***

[Advice For Ruby Beginners
1](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2007/09/27/advice-for-ruby-beginners-1/)

[Advice For Ruby Beginners
2](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2007/10/01/advice-for-ruby-beginners-2/)

Technorati Tags: [Advice For Ruby
Beginners](http://technorati.com/tag/Advice+For+Ruby+Beginners), [Ruby
Beginners](http://technorati.com/tag/Ruby+Beginners), [Ruby
Interviews](http://technorati.com/tag/Ruby+Interviews), [Ruby Serial
Interview](http://technorati.com/tag/Ruby+Serial+Interview)
