---
draft: false
title: The Future of Ruby is Fail!
date: 2009-06-09
author: Satish Talim
authorlink: "http://satishtalim.com"
socialsharing: true
authorgoogleplus: https://plus.google.com/+SatishTalim/about
authorlinkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/satishtalim
authortwitter: http://twitter.com/IndianGuru
authorfacebook: https://www.facebook.com/rubylearning
categories:
- Interview
- Rails
- Ruby
- Ruby on Rails
description:
- Four Ruby experts from Pune, India discuss the future of Ruby from the Indian context.
dsq_thread_id:
- 208369477
keywords:
- The Future of Ruby is Fail!,Ruby Programming,Ruby Interviews,Pune,India
layout: post
permalink: /2009/06/09/the-future-of-ruby-is-fail/
tags:
- india
- pune
- ruby interviews
- ruby programming
- The Future of Ruby is Fail!
thesis_description:
- Four Ruby experts from Pune, India discuss the future of Ruby from the Indian context.
thesis_keywords:
- The Future of Ruby is Fail!,Ruby Programming,Ruby Interviews,Pune,India
topsy_short_url:
- http://bit.ly/cB4xgu
---
## The Future of Ruby is Fail!

### Preamble

*Thanks to [Ilya Grigorik](http://www.igvita.com/) for initiating the
discussion in the Indian Ruby / Rails community around the premise
“Future of Ruby is Fail” (yes, somewhat tongue in cheek, but also
serious), trying to get a feel for the concerns in the community. The
focus of this discussion would be on the Indian market / geographical
area.*

*RubyLearning is pleased to have with us, Ruby / Rails Gurus from Pune,
India: **Ashutosh Ambekar** from Persistent Systems Ltd., **Devendra
Deshmukh** from e-Zest, **Gautam Rege** from Josh Software Pvt. Ltd.,
**Nick Adams** from SapnaSolutions Pvt. Ltd. and **Shabbir Merchant**
from Pragmatic Technology Solutions.*

* * * * *

**Q: The title of this blog post is controversial but many in the
community are talking about it. What’s your quick reaction to this
statement?**

![Gautam
Rege](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/rege.jpg "Gautam Rege")**Gautam
Rege\>\>** Since you asked for my quick reaction, my answer is an
emphatic “No, Ruby rocks!”. However, the thought did send a shiver down
my spine! The reason put in one simple word – passion. Can a passion
really die?
![:)](http://rubylearning.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_smile.gif)
Given the “Indian perspective”, the industry is adapting to Ruby, but
slowly. A lot of companies are looking at Ruby with a fresh outlook than
one which is dismissive in nature. It is going to take some time before
Ruby becomes as popular as Java and .NET applications but my gut feeling
tells me – its only a matter of time ! Sethupathi Asokan, my colleague
who co-founded Josh Software with me feels that Ruby will ride on the
Rails popularity. There are more takers for Rails and hence Ruby, than
the other way round. So, as Rails gets popular, Ruby lives on!

![Shabbir
Merchant](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/shabbir.png "Shabbir Merchant")**Shabbir
Merchant\>\>** I think 3-5 years is a long time, but I already see that
Ruby and Rails, although a popular platform in North America/Europe, has
failed to gain traction in the Indian Market place. But I think I do not
completely agree that it will fail completely but what can happen is
that it will not penetrate the market, the way Java has done. I think
mass penetration will not happen unless big companies like IBM, HP, Sun
endorse it in a big way. Currently they are heavily invested in Java and
a move to Ruby would be very challenging.

![Ashutosh
Ambekar](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/Ashutosh.png "Ashutosh Ambekar")**Ashutosh
Ambekar\>\>** No! Ruby won’t fail. It has been around for 10 years and
still being actively developed. Ruby 1.9.x recently came out and is
showing best performance numbers. Likes of Sun Microsystems and
Microsoft are rolling in millions of dollars on their version of Ruby
(which will adhere to “standard” Ruby). I have observed that software
shops in the US considering Ruby (in some flavor) for developing their
enterprise applications. With support from larger ISVs and programmer
community bringing in frameworks based on Ruby (Ruby on Rails, Sinatra
etc), I do not think Ruby will fail, it will evolve and will fuel rapid
application development using meta-programming.

![Nick
Adams](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/NickAdams.png "Nick Adams")**Nick
Adams\>\>** My first reaction would be to ask: ‘What do we mean by
fail?’. I think if we mean a failure for Ruby to gain traction and
massive uptake, perhaps. It is generally the case that for wide scale
adoption of any new technology, big business needs to adopt it. This is
unlikely for a number of reasons. However, I believe Ruby continues to
see growth in many other areas, notably in web application development.
I do not sense a failure for Ruby in the short or medium term. My quick
reaction is surprise that there is talk in the community of a ‘fail’!

![Devendra
Deshmukh](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/Deven.jpg "Devendra Deshmukh")**Devendra
Deshmukh\>\>** Very innovative and thought provocative blog post title.
I believe Ruby won’t fail in the next 3-5 years but it will undergo
substantial changes to get rid of current technology limitations. Ruby
has inevitably became one of the top two or three strategic choices for
start-ups and early stage web 2.0 and social applications. But since,
other programming frameworks and tool-sets are learning Ruby’s lessons
and unless we see cohesive actions from the Ruby Community, it looks
like Ruby will get some serious competition in next 1-2 years.
Improvement on Scalability, performance, security and deployment may
help Ruby to maintain its leadership amongst its peers and competition
as well. While reading various community posts, I am certainly seeing
positive actions towards future.

**Q: Imagine for a moment that in the long run Ruby did ‘fail’, what in
your opinion would have been the causes of this failure?**

**Gautam Rege\>\>** Adaptability and Availability of resources. I was
arguing about the choice of technology for web-based banking software
with a close associate of mine, who sits pretty high up in the technical
think tank of a leading bank in India. I was told in no uncertain terms
that .NET ASP, C\# would be the choice of technology. Aghast at the
response, I retorted saying that ‘whatever you build, I can build better
and faster in Rails’. He said calmly – ‘I don’t deny YOUR skills, but
what will we do when you are not around?’. There are hordes of .NET
resources available in India from zillions of technical institutes who
are churning out .NET and Java professionals. I don’t mean to say that
.NET, C\# are more popular but the more commonly taught languages are
the ones which people in India tend to adapt to. There are a lot of
people who know .NET, C\# than Ruby. Currently, the situation is
improving but it will be some time before large corporations adapt to
Ruby. Having said this, currently the Indian market is flooded with Java
and .NET resources and it is a fact that a lot of multi-tiered critical
applications are built on these platforms and not Ruby. When anyone
adapts to Ruby, they have to be sure of a supply of Ruby professionals.
Solution, you may ask: We need to get Ruby taught in schools !

**Shabbir Merchant\>\>** I think if Ruby fails, the failure of Ruby
could be attributed to multiple reasons. I think the most important one
could be fragmentation of the community in terms of using different VMs
or even due to different Ruby web frameworks. We have already seen this
in the case of Rails and Merb. But thankfully this has been resolved by
the merger. But such situations could arise again. The huge success of
Java platform I think is that they have good leadership in place and a
community process for single VM. Another reason for the failure could be
attributed to the rapid changes in the framework which are sometimes
essential but leaves lot of legacy things to be migrated. Another
potential reason could be our inability to attract and make it easier
for developers coming from Java/.Net/PHP world to move to Ruby.

**Ashutosh Ambekar\>\>** Too many choices each competing for the market
place with their own “customization” over standard Ruby. Programmers may
find it difficult to choose and stick to a flavor for long, or may give
it up all together for another “stable” alternative. Functional
programming languages become popular sooner with frameworks (like Lift
etc.) which may be considered to be more scalable, secure, robust by
software architects.

**Nick Adams\>\>** If Ruby were to fail (lost traction or suffered
quality issues), it might be due to over dilution of the core developer
community, resulting in some serious problems with its implementation.
This might lead to developers switching their applications to another
simple OO language with similar capabilities, such as Python. This was
the fear of many, including Zed Shaw when he rather publicly declared
his loss of faith in the Rails community and shortly after Ruby.

**Devendra Deshmukh\>\>** Failure will be certainly attributed to
technology limitations mentioned earlier and divisive Ruby community.
But the key factor would be emergence of better competitive framework. I
think it is a possibility in the long run. This new framework may be
derived from Ruby but supported by strong community or enterprise
organizations like IBM or Sun.

**Q: How is the Ruby market different in India than in say USA/Canada?**

**Gautam Rege\>\>** The Indian market is the still a conservative one –
people will not accept new things unless they see it working ‘somewhere
else’. Bigger corporations take time in adapting to new technology and
considering the man-power availability in India, prefer to keep an IT
development team in-house. SMEs (Small and Medium-sized enterprises) are
far more adaptable and open to newer solutions if they are robust and
cost-effective. This is where I foresee (and hope) Rails making it big !
SMEs can benefit a lot from products and applications using Ruby. And
this shall have its chain-reaction: Bigger corporations seeing this
change shall start looking at Ruby. Technical and Training institutes in
turn, seeing the need for Ruby shall start introducing it in their
curriculum. Sethu (as he popularly called) feels that today there are
more people fluent in Python, Perl and PHP than in Ruby. Is there a fear
of ‘Yet another scripting language to learn?’
![:)](http://rubylearning.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_smile.gif)
So, adaptability is a slow but steady process.

**Shabbir Merchant\>\>** I have executed some projects for Indian
clients and for them the cost of development and impatience outweighs
speed of development and all the goodies which Ruby/Rails brings with
it. Good Rails developers who cam deliver practical applications come at
a higher cost compared to a PHP/.Net/Java developers. Also, I have found
that even small clients prefer to develop and maintain applications
within their respective organizations instead of outsourcing it. Hence
when they decide on developing an application it is easier for them to
find a .Net/Java developer as their numbers are large.

**Ashutosh Ambekar\>\>** The main difference is that you need to educate
the Indian VP engineering / decision maker about what Ruby (on Rails) is
and how it will help them, giving them examples of the success stories
(in the west). US/Canadian customers come with their homework and ask
you to develop a solution using Ruby (on Rails). There are Indian
startups whom I worked with and agreed on using Ruby (on Rails) but
these are very few. Majority of the Indian software market still finds
comfort in .NET/Java world – and for obvious reason – Ruby skills are
still scarce to find in India. In the USA/Canada Ruby is being adopted
at a faster pace – in the enterprise software area as well. It will be a
while before this trend hits India as well.

**Nick Adams\>\>** I believe Ruby is a language of creativity. It makes
doing otherwise complicated things simple, so you can throw together
brilliant ideas elegantly and in fewer lines. I am yet to see creative
development work taking off in India. Currently the core market for Ruby
and frameworks such as Rails in India is rapid prototyping for US lead
ideas, or outsourcing existing projects. Perhaps as use of the web in
India increases, we may see this change.

**Devendra Deshmukh\>\>** Indian enterprise customers definitely are not
aware about the technology benefits of Ruby and also lack internal Ruby
resources to maintain systems. But many Indian product/Web 2.0 startups
are adopting Ruby to a great extent. I have seen successful Ruby usage
at many startups in-hand-in with agile practices viz. Scrum.

**Q: What is your perspective on the future of Ruby in India?**

**Gautam Rege\>\>** The future of India is the young software
professionals. The biggest asset of India is man power, i.e. the
resources. The biggest challenge unfortunately in India is ‘quality
resources’. There has been a compliant for a long time that development
quality of Indian professionals requires to be worked upon. However,
with Ruby there is a very easy, clean and simple way to change this
perspective. JRuby has added a completely new facet to Ruby and will
encourage young Java professionals to adopt Ruby now! I am emphatic that
programming fundamentals need to be taught and clarified very early –
otherwise we end up writing code like standard procedural languages
ignoring the concise and crystallized nature of Ruby eg. using blocks
and iterators for one! This implies that the Ruby faculty also needs to
be up to the mark ! The good thing is that a lot of students are
interested in learning Ruby. So, I feel, as the number of Ruby resources
increases, the future of Ruby in India will brighten. The numerous
online local communities discussing Ruby and Rails are helping this
cause.

**Shabbir Merchant\>\>** Here in India I have noticed that all
organizations big and small are okay to outsource their development
work. But when it comes to hosting and maintaining it, they want to hire
someone inhouse. They insist of having someone inhouse to take care of
project once it is deployed. They think it would be easier to find a
Java/.Net guy to take care of the work. The low number of training
institutes offering Ruby/Rails training affects the number of skilled
manpower. I would specially like to highlight potential reasons it might
fail in the Indian context. Ruby is still a technology which has not
come into the mainstream in India. There are handful of applications
built in Ruby/Rails in India for the Indian consumers. Also failure of
Ruby/Rails could be attributed to a lack of skilled manpower. Although
there are some training sources available in India. these are too few
and whatever is taught gets outdated soon. Hence, I would say lack of
quality and quantity of training institution could lead to its failure
in India.

**Ashutosh Ambekar\>\>** Very bright! There is tremendous scope for Ruby
in Indian SME segment – it’s fast to develop and market and cheap in
terms of overall cost of ownership. I see more and more engineers
showing interest in learning Ruby (we grew from team of 4 to team of 40+
in a year) and are enjoying it and are willing to take a bet on it.

**Nick Adams\>\>** I think the prospects are mixed. As passion for the
web in India increases, and more developers turn to alternatives to
Java, Ruby may gain some traction. I also sense that the current
employment climate makes more entrepreneurs out of us, and that
graduates trained in Java and C are increasingly interested in learning
more modern languages such as Ruby. It may not be enough, however.
Developers in India tend to follow the jobs market, currently centered
BPO work in traditional languages, so if tech leaders can’t find a way
to create a buzz around Ruby and create jobs, we may not see significant
growth.

**Devendra Deshmukh\>\>** Being part of 100% exports oriented
organization, I am definitely not an expert on the Indian Market. But
from a resources point of view, I feel there is definitely a need of
having more ROR programmers available in India. This constraint many a
times goes against finalizing application/adoption of ROR in
software/web projects.

**Q: What are the drivers behind current adoption, what are the counter
arguments?**

**Gautam Rege\>\>** Cost and speed of development of Ruby applications
and the flexibility to customize and change the application at a later
stage beats all other programming platforms hands down ! Sethu adds that
the Ruby gems today provide integration and access to the latest
technologies like Amazon S3, etc. This ensures that Ruby is always in
league with new technologies that become available. On the down side, I
feel what needs to be strengthened is the source code protection (which
does contradict the very premise of Open Source). Larger corporations
require that their deployments be protected not only by system level
security but at the source code level too. I have seen Thoughtworks
Mingle encrypt their Ruby code to protect their IP, but will this become
a norm or a novelty?
![:)](http://rubylearning.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_smile.gif)
Another problem with Rruby is development and deployment of security in
tiered applications, especially in finance sector. No matter how much we
try, we are not able to convince large financial corporates to get their
applications built in Ruby. I hope someone out there contradicts me and
tells me that this step has been achieved. People have long complained
about scalability issues in Rails but I think that has been very well
handled with current setups.

**Shabbir Merchant\>\>** Indian market is very cost conscious. I think
at this point people are looking at Rails for doing medium sized apps.
People do not want to build heavy traffic apps with it, due to
affordability of good developers and good hosting providers. There are
some Indian Ruby/Rails hosting providers but they are not skilled enough
to keep pace with the rapid changes in the deployment options. It is
much much cheaper to host an application in PHP/Java/.Net than do a
Ruby/Rails application.

**Ashutosh Ambekar\>\>** Business drivers for current adoption are rapid
development (with integrated testing) using frameworks like Rails, cost
of ownership, deployment solutions available on the cloud, database
support for most of the popular databases, ease of creating REST based
web applications using Rails framework and last but not least, big ISVs
are investing in and are embracing Ruby in some form or other. Something
that is non-tangible but is still a driver is that engineers enjoy
programming in Ruby – I do! However, frequently, there are questions
raised on scalability of Rails applications. This is one of the major
reasons why someone may not adopt Ruby based solution. Another factor
preventing adoption as mentioned above is availability of skilled Ruby
developers.

**Nick Adams\>\>** One driver behind adoption are probably jobs created
by outsourced work from the US and Europe, both straight Rails
outsourcing and client projects being developed in Rails. Another, and
the more interesting driver, is the startup and entrepreneurial
community. Founders and techies of the increasing number of web startups
in India are looking to Ruby as their creative tool.

**Devendra Deshmukh\>\>** Most important business drivers as per my
perception are rapid development and support for cloud deployment. This
has really enabled start-ups to quickly come out with quick
proof-of-concepts or pilot of their business ideas. Many have made bucks
as well though VCs or early customers.

**Q: Do you think the community will thrive in the long run?**

**Gautam Rege\>\>** I have no doubt about this. In fact, I would venture
out and say that India will probably be a Ruby application “deployment
hub” instead of providing development only. I foresee a lot of SMEs at
first and then larger Indian corporates embracing Ruby in the next few
years.

**Shabbir Merchant\>\>** Although there are problems I still think the
community will thrive all over, including India.

**Ashutosh Ambekar\>\>** Absolutely!

**Nick Adams\>\>** Yes, but how much depends on two things. First, if
the work continues to come from the US and Europe, it will thrive.
Second, news travels fast in India, especially in tech circles, and if
we can manage to create a buzz in the small company and startup circles,
it’s likely that Ruby will see a similar success here. It’s been great
to see an increasing number of attendees and Ruby Fun Days and other
such events.

**Devendra Deshmukh\>\>** I agree with others. Community will thrive and
with more growth rate in emerging markets like India.

**Q: What is your viewpoint about Indian RoR developers, the Indian
environment, the Indian market, the type of applications being developed
in India?**

**Gautam Rege\>\>** I mentioned this earlier and will re-iterate that
considering the conservative nature of Indian markets, Ruby will be
embraced slowly. However, like the telecom revolution in India, once it
catches on, I feel (and hope) that Ruby will become BIG .. of course not
at the scale that telecom has grown in India but at least a noticeable
one. There are currently quite a few Ruby and Rails training institutes
in India which are VERY GOOD but I feel that till we hit the grass-roots
i.e. schools, colleges and universities, the going will be tough. I
believe Satish Talim has already started making the difference in Pune.
Pune University has introduced Ruby in its computer science course
syllabus – now thats an impressive start !

**Shabbir Merchant\>\>** I think a very small fraction of the Indian
developers are skilled enough to deliver world class Ruby/Rails apps.
People are not up to date with all the latest and greatest things
happening in the Ruby/Rails world. I think this is partially attributed
to the rapid changes in the Ruby/Rails world itself. The Indian
development environment is very focused on Windows platform and you will
find magnitudes of developers working on Windows platform. I think
Windows should be considered an important platform if we want to attract
more people to Ruby/ROR. There are stacks such as Bitnami and Instant
Rails available for windows, but there are several Mac/Linux tools being
used which do not perform well on Windows. From my experience and
talking to developers here, I found that majority of them do their
development in Windows and deployment is done on a Linux Server.

**Ashutosh Ambekar\>\>** Well, to start with there are not many RoR
developers in India as compared to other popular technologies. Most of
us at Persistent learnt it ourselves rather than taking any glucose from
a trainer. There are few well known companies in Rails technology in
India, however I do not see much contribution to the community from
India. I am pretty optimistic that there will be more RoR developers
going forward fuelling more RoR projects. In India, I think most of the
applications getting developed would fall under web 2.0 / consumer web
applications.

**Nick Adams\>\>** An interesting question I ask of my developers, is
‘what motivated you to learn Rails?’. Most answer ‘because my company
had a project in Rails’. Some will tell you they learned it for fun, or
to build an application of their own, but they are in the minority. I
think this nicely summarizes the environment here, that it is more about
jobs than creativity or experimentation. This is reflected in the
relatively low number of Indian designed and developed Rails
applications. We are trying to change that, but it requires a switch in
the mindset of ordinary developers from seeing development as a job to
seeing it as a passion and outlet for their own sense of creativity.

**Devendra Deshmukh\>\>** I believe Indian ROR developers are definitely
best in class like their .NET/JEE peers. Most of the ROR developers in
India as well as the ROR developers at e-Zest are self learned
programmers. Most of them shifted from PHP and JEE due to personal
likings or organization’s direction. Most seen Ruby applications are Web
2.0 and Social applications. Most of the Ruby projects are shorter in
duration and with smaller team size. This results in not having proper
career growth plan like established .NET/JEE is a challenge to address.

**Q: Can you give us a roadmap of what you would want to see from Ruby
to make it a success in India?**

**Gautam Rege\>\>** I think localization support will play a big part to
make Ruby a success in India. JRuby will give access to the vast Java
localization library and Rails merging with Merb will get the best of
best into the framework. SMEs will probably be the only ones who will
adapt to Ruby soon. The number of SMEs in India is so overwhelming that
the market will be a huge target sector. A lot of industries are trying
to go “Paperless” and are now also ‘internet aware’. The cost of
implementing an ERP or a distributed office is huge. Ruby and Rails can
play a very big part in this to ensure that these requirements are met
with cost-effectiveness and high quality of the application.

**Shabbir Merchant\>\>** We want more visibility to Ruby by introducing
them as courses in colleges, more training centers and conferences
devoted to Ruby. A Ruby/Rails conference would be good to start with.

**Ashutosh Ambekar\>\>** In the Indian context, to make it a success,
Ruby has to reach colleges undergraduates and professors. Ruby should be
used in the college assignments. These undergraduates are going to be
next engineers and hence making them aware of the beauty and power of
Ruby will certainly help. Community can also play a major role by
answering the skeptics about scalability and security issues. Success
stories of Ruby 1.9.x with Rails in production environment will
certainly help. Since most of the Indian students use Microsoft
environments, availability of better tools on Windows platform for Ruby
(on Rails) will help greatly. Linux is getting popular gradually, so
bundling the latest and greatest Ruby with the Linux distros will also
help.

**Nick Adams\>\>** I think Ruby is great, but we need a roadmap for
adoption that includes energizing young people who currently see Java
and C++ as their only path, because of the jobs available. Going to talk
in colleges and universities is one thing to be encouraged, as well as
including business incubators and small development companies as
potential adopters. Events and conferences will help, but we need some
leadership too. It would be great to see more truly Indian web startups
in Rails, as well as Ruby and Rails Gurus emerging from this side of the
world. The talent is here, it’s time for the passion!

**Devendra Deshmukh\>\>** Ruby needs to become part of main stream IT
education. It needs to become part of formal college education as well
as standard IT training available at professional centers. Focus on past
success stories and more visibility in media will definitely help.

**Q: Anything else that you would like to add?**

**Ashutosh Ambekar\>\>** At Persistent, we have created a center of
excellence for Ruby and is currently staffed by 40+ enthusiastic
engineers (and growing!). Looking at the current trend, we have
developed IPR in the form of social networking accelerators. The
accelerators help rapidly develop social networking portals by providing
ready-to-use features; all we need to implement is the domain part which
changes from portal to portal. Using the accelerators, we have developed
a social networking portal for astrologers, astrology researchers and
advice seekers as our own initiative and would be launching it very
soon.

**Nick Adams\>\>** Thanks Satish!

**Devendra Deshmukh\>\>** e-Zest expert ROR team members are working on
ROR from its nascent stage which is a long time and have overcome a
great many technical and process challenges. We are currently developing
product accelerators using Ruby. e-Zest provide complete ROR technology
strategy and product development solution to ISVs and start-ups.
Start-ups are fun, we understand their every changing needs due to
dynamic market expectations, and we thrive on enabling their businesses.
Ruby definitely has brighter future, I assure to interested current and
future IT professionals that you will definitely be able to make a
successful career with your Ruby skills.

