---
author: Satish Talim
categories:
- news
- rails
- ruby
date: 2007-04-11
layout: post
title: 'Interview: Shashank Date'
---

[![Shashank
Date](http://www.puneruby.com/blog/images/2006/shashank.jpg)](http://www.puneruby.com/blog/images/2006/shashank.jpg "Shashank Date")

(This interview appeared before on 28th Aug. 2006 on the PuneRuby blog).

Today we talk to our own Ruby Guru, **Shashank Date**.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Hello Shashank, and welcome to PuneRuby. Could you
tell us something about yourself – your background; where you are
based…?
<!--more-->

**Shashank Date\>\>** Unlike the other gurus interviewed before me, I
hail from Pune and am glad to be an active member of **PuneRuby**. I did
my Masters (MCA) in Computer Applications from Pune University in 1987
and worked in various organizations in India (notably C-DAC) till 1994.
I immigrated to the U.S. in 1994 and have been in Overland Park, Kansas
since then. For the past 12 years, I have worked as a consultant to
various Fortune 500 companies. I am curently a freelancer (thanks to
Ruby on Rails) and also the founder of **[Reevik Technologies Pvt.
Ltd.](http://www.reevik.com)**, a Pune based company also focused on web
application development and mobile application development.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Given the choices out there, why did you select
Ruby?

**Shashank Date\>\>** Back in March 2002, I was looking for a scripting
solution to address a temporary requirement of writing a query
parallelizer for a (closed source) system I was working on. I accidently
came across the PickAxe book and found a very neat thread based solution
which almost matched my needs. I immediately set forth to investigate
further and as I dug deeper into Ruby, fell in love with the language
and the community. I did not feel like investigating more options to
choose from.

**Satish Talim\>\>** How did you learn Ruby and when?

**Shashank Date\>\>** Most of the Ruby I Iearnt is self taught with
kind, patient support from many gurus in the community (too many to
mention), often no less than Matz himself. I also owe a lot to the
authors of these fine books: “Programming Ruby” (a.k.a PickAxe), “The
Ruby Way” and “Learn Ruby in 21 days”.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Which features of Ruby do you like the most?

**Shashank Date\>\>** Blocks, dynamism and syntax sugar make Ruby shine!

**Satish Talim\>\>** Do you think Ruby has the potential to be a
mainstream programming language?

**Shashank Date\>\>** Purely from the technical standpoint, absolutely!
But for a language to become mainstream, there needs to be a
socio-political pressure. Fortunately, that pressure has been built up
by the pre-eminent web application framework “Ruby on Rails”, and
judging by the number of companies both big and small looking at it
seriously makes me believe that the tipping point has been achieved.

**Satish Talim\>\>** What applications, utilities have you developed in
Ruby and what platform are you running these applications on?

**Shashank Date\>\>** All my Ruby applications and utilities have been
on the Windows platform out of necessity, not choice. As mentioned
earlier, I had developed a library which helped parallelizing queries to
MS SQL Server 2000 which remains closed source. I have also written a
library to shallow parse t-SQL, a utility to interface the Windows
scheduler, a library to interface Lego Mindstorms Robotics Kit, all of
which are in the open source on RubyForge. I am member of the one-click
installer team for Windows and the win32-utils team, both of which are
one of the most downloaded packages in the Ruby world.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Anything else you would like to share with the
PuneRuby members?

**Shashank Date\>\>** Yes, back in May 2005 when I had visited Pune, I
had lamented the fact that there is no PuneRuby Users Group and
discussed the idea of sponsoring such an activity. I am thrilled to see
that you spearheaded that effort and now claim to have the largest Ruby
Users Group around. Congratulations and keep up the good work!

**Satish Talim\>\>** Thanks Shashank Date for sharing your views with
the PuneRuby members.

Technorati Tags: [Interviews](http://technorati.com/tag/Interviews),
[Interview: Shashank
Date](http://technorati.com/tag/Interview%3A+Shashank+Date), [Ruby
Interviews](http://technorati.com/tag/Ruby+Interviews), [Shashank
Date](http://technorati.com/tag/Shashank+Date)

