---
title: "Advice For Ruby Beginners 1"
author: Satish Talim
date: "2007-09-27"
layout: post
permalink: /2007/09/27/advice-for-ruby-beginners-1/
thesis_keywords:
  - Ruby for Noobs, Ruby beginners
topsy_short_url:
  - http://bit.ly/9VarRD
categories:
  - beginners
  - interview
  - popular
  - rails
  - ruby
  - training
tags:
  - ruby beginners
  - ruby for noobs
---
*The popularity of Ruby grows exponentially and with that, more and more
people are learning the language. Recently, 400+ would-be Ruby
developers from around the world registered for the [Free Ruby
Lessons](http://rubylearning.com/satishtalim/ruby_guide.html) at
RubyLearning.com and more keep joining everyday. Most Ruby beginners
have a plethora of questions related to the language; opportunities in
Ruby; Ruby’s future.*<!--more-->

***Satish Talim** of RubyLearning.com talked to Ruby Gurus from around
the world, to get their views and opinions.*

*We are pleased to have with us, Ruby Gurus: **Agnieszka Figiel** from
Poland, **David Black** from USA, **Fabio Akita** from Brazil, **Jamie
van Dyke** from UK, **Jamis Buck** from USA, **Jens-Christian Fischer**
from Switzerland, **Juanjo Bazan** from Spain, **Julian Tarkhanov** from
Russia / Netherlands, **Manik Juneja** from India, **Matt Palmer** from
Australia, **Mislav Marohnic** from Croatia, **Ola Bini** from Sweden,
**Pedro Custodio** from Portugal, **Peter Cooper** from UK, **Remco van
‘t Veer** from Netherlands and **Sau Sheong Chang** from Singapore. They
would give us their perspective on the various questions facing the
participants – would-be Ruby developers.*

* * * * *

**Satish\>\> A warm welcome to you all. For the benefit of the
participants, could each one of you tell us something about your self?**

![Agnieszka
Figiel-Pieczykolan](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/agnieszka.jpg "Agnieszka Figiel-Pieczykolan")**Agnieszka
(Poland)\>\>** Agnieszka Figiel, Computer Science graduate from Krakow.
I have been involved with Ruby on Rails since 2005, when I joined [Lunar
Logic Polska](http://www.llp.pl/site/), one of the first companies
offering Ruby on Rails solutions in Poland. Today I work as a programmer
for [DreamLab Onet.pl](http://www.dreamlab.pl/), and additionally I
teach Ruby and RoR at the Jagiellonian University in KrakÃ³w. Since its
beginnings I have participated in the local [KrakÃ³w Ruby User
Group](http://ruby.org.pl/).

![David
Black](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/david2.jpg "David Black")**David
(USA)\>\>** I’m a Ruby author, programmer, and trainer. I’ve been using
Ruby since 2000, and I’m one of the founding co-directors of Ruby
Central, Inc., the organization that produces RubyConf and RailsConf. I
run my own consultancy, Ruby Power and Light, LLC.

![Fabio
Akita](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/akita.jpg "Fabio Akita")**Fabio
(Brazil)\>\>** My name is Fabio Akita, a Brazilian Rails enthusiast,
also known online as “AkitaOnRails”. I regularly write posts to my own
[blog](http://www.akitaonrails.com/) and I published the very first book
tailored for the Brazilian audience called “Repensando a Web com Rails”.
I am now a full-time Ruby on Rails developer working as Brazil Rails
Practice Manager for the Utah company Surgeworks LLC.

![Jamie van
Dyke](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/jamie.jpg "Jamie van Dyke")**Jamie
(UK)\>\>** I’m Jamie van Dyke, I work at [Engine
Yard](http://www.engineyard.com/) and teach/write Ruby/Rails course for
Skillsmatter also. I’ve been using Ruby and Rails for 3 years.

![Jamis
Buck](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/jamis.jpg "Jamis Buck")**Jamis
(USA)\>\>** I’ve been programming professionally since 1998, in a
variety of environments. These days I write [Ruby (on
Rails)](http://workingwithrails.com/person/5309-jamis-buck) code
full-time, and couldn’t be happier.
![:)](http://rubylearning.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_smile.gif)
I’m also a father of three children, who keep me and my wife quite busy,
and happy. I’m also learning woodcarving, and have found that I really
enjoy doing things with my hands.

![Jens-Christian
Fischer](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/jens.jpg "Jens-Christian Fischer")**Jens
(Switzerland)\>\>** I’m Jens-Christian Fischer. I run a small
development company in Zurich, and currently I’m flooded with Rails
projects (which is a “good thing” ™). I have been doing software
development for over 20 years, in a lot of different languages (all the
way from Assembler, Pascal, Modula-2, Smalltalk, C, C++, Java, Basic and
of course Ruby). I have an interest in computer languages and have
dabbled in many others (Prolog, Oberon, Python, Lisp to name a few). I
[blog](http://blog.invisible.ch/) and work on way too many things at the
same time.

![Juanjo
Bazan](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/juanjo.jpg "Juanjo Bazan")**Juanjo
(Spain)\>\>** I’m Juanjo Bazan, a web developer and university professor
based in Madrid, Spain. I’ve been programming professionally (mostly
Java) since 1999; now I run my own little company and after adopted
Rails a couple of years ago. I’m close to working full-time just with
Ruby. I am member of the organization of the annual Spanish Ruby and
Rails Conference and co-founder of the Madrid Ruby User Group.

![Julian
Tarkhanov](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/julian.jpg "Julian Tarkhanov")**Julian
(Netherlands)\>\>** I’m Julian Tarkhanov, also known as Julik. During
the day I work for a visual effects / post production company in
Amsterdam, the Netherlands, where we do freaky things with images in
commercials and features. Before that I was doing graphic design and web
development (the second is kind of a hobby/night job by now). Started
out as a pure design person, but being a victim of a few management
failings I took over the programming part of my projects and started
doing PHP. After about 3 years of doing PHP almost full-time I came to
Rails as an implementation of everything I missed or could not do in
PHP. I run a somewhat hideous [subversion
repository](http://julik.textdriven.com/svn/tools/) with all things Ruby
and Rails where anyone can steal things from.

![Manik
Juneja](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/manik.jpeg "Manik Juneja")**Manik
(India)\>\>** I am Manik Juneja and I own [Vinayak
Solutions](http://vinsol.com/) (VinSol) which is one of the early rails
adopter companies in India. VinSol is based in New Delhi, India. VinSol
has been in business since the year 2000. We were working on J2EE and
PHP before we read about Rails on some blog about 2 years ago. I started
dabbling with Rails and enjoyed developing on the framework so much that
now 100% of VinSol’s revenue comes from Rails and Ruby development. We
are probably the only Indian company to have written opensouce Rails
plugins and Ruby gems. I also [blog](http://fromdelhi.com/), though not
so regularly.

![Matt
Palmer](http://planet.slug.org.au/heads/mpalmer.png "Matt Palmer")**Matt
(Australia)\>\>** I’m a mid-twenties geek, married, two dogs, who
volunteers to fight wildfires and grows his own vegetables. On a
technical front, I’ve been playing with computers and programming them
since I was 6 years old, and have gone through a number of environments
and languages. I’ve settled into a comfortable groove doing Ninja
Systems Administration and web application development for [Solutions
First](http://www2.solutionsfirst.com.au/) in Sydney, Australia.

![Mislav
Marohnic](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/mislav.jpg "Mislav Marohnic")**Mislav
(Croatia)\>\>** I am Mislav Marohnic, formerly known as Sulien to some
in the Rails community. I’ve been working with Rails for over a year now
and working professionally as a freelancer for at least 6 months. From
January this year, I’ve been a member of Prototype Core team so I could
contribute to the framework both server- and client-side. I’ve
contributed in a number of ways, but perhaps my most used code would be
the [will\_paginate plugin](http://rock.errtheblog.com/will_paginate),
the development of which was handled over to me by its original
starters, [errtheblog guys](http://errtheblog.com/).

![Ola Bini](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/ola.jpg "Ola Bini")**Ola
(Sweden)\>\>** Hi. My name is Ola Bini and I’m originally from Sweden. I
currently live in London and work for ThoughtWorks Studios, the product
development division of global consulting firm ThoughtWorks. I am also
one of the core developers of JRuby, a project that aims to bring Ruby
to the JVM. I’m a programming language geek, and LISP has long been one
of my favorite languages. When I found Ruby I was intrigued – the
language seemed very easy and simple, but digging down there was untold
depths of power. Very much like LISP, so I felt right at home. That was
about 4 years ago now.

![Pedro
Custodio](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/pedro.jpg "Pedro Custodio")**Pedro
(Portugal)\>\>** Well, my name is Pedro Custodio, sometimes referred to
as “pecus”, I’ve studied Computer Science in Lisbon and have been
involved in internet projects since 96. Whenever I can, I write on a
blog, entitled “[Centopeia](http://blog.centopeia.com/)“, covering all
aspects of my technology work, from development issues to more overall
themes. I’m currently working as software developer in Portugal, last
year I helped bring to life SHiFT – Social and Human Ideas For
Technology, a conference about the role of technology as an enabler for
changes in our daily lives.

![Peter
Cooper](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/petercooper.jpg "Peter Cooper")**Peter
(UK)\>\>** I’m Peter Cooper, author of “*Beginning Ruby*” for Apress and
founder of Ruby Inside. I first began to use Ruby in 2004, after being
tempted by the then-new Ruby on Rails framework, although I rapidly
became more interested in Ruby itself. I’ve used Ruby in both of the
businesses I’ve built up over the past couple of years, which I have
sold this year, namely [FeedDigest.com](http://www.feeddigest.com/) and
[Code Snippets](http://snippets.dzone.com/). I am also known for running
the [Ruby Inside](http://www.rubyinside.com/) weblog, currently the most
popular Ruby related weblog with over 11,000 subscribers.

![Remco van 't
Veer](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/remco.jpg "Remco van 't Veer")**Remco
(Netherlands)\>\>** I am Remco van ‘t Veer, a software developer from
the Netherlands. I’ve been building web applications for 10 years now.
First using Perl CGI and for years using Java. After reading the
“[Rolling with Ruby on
Rails](http://www.onlamp.com/pub/a/onlamp/2005/01/20/rails.html)”
article by Curt Hibbs, I wandered into the Rails camp leaving years of
Java web development behind me. Rails reintroduced me to Ruby (we had a
short fling a few years earlier) and I don’t want to look back. Among my
contributions to the Ruby and Rails sphere are the [EXIFR
gem](http://exifr.rubyforge.org/), the [dutchify Rails
plugin](http://svn.remvee.net/plugins/dutchify/README) and
RubyEnRails.nl.

![Sau
Sheong](http://www.rubylearning.com/images/sau.jpg "Sau Sheong")**Sau
(Singapore)\>\>** I’m Chang Sau Sheong, a Singapore-based Ruby and Rails
programmer and enthusiast. I run a medium-sized (50+) software
development team for a French software company, with teams based in
France and in Singapore, doing Java EE development for banks and have
around 12 years of experience in enterprise application programming
though 10 of those years have been with Java and only 2 with Ruby and
Rails. I participate frequently in the local Ruby and Rails community,
Singapore Ruby Brigade and I run a moderately popular technology-focused
[blog](http://blog.saush.com/).

**Satish\>\> According to you, why is Ruby a good language to learn?**

**Agnieszka (Poland)\>\>** It is a good choice for beginner programmers,
as it is devoid of syntax clutter and intuitive to the extreme. It is
also considerably well suited for learning object oriented programming.
It can be an inspiring change for an experienced programmer, with its
fully OO architecture and meta-programming capabilities. It is a
powerful tool both for rapid scripting and refined programming. Plus,
learning ruby and participating in the ruby community brings one closer
to people who care about beautiful coding and widely accepted good
programming practices.

**David (USA)\>\>** There are two main reasons to learn Ruby: because
you find the language wonderful, and because you want to take advantage
of Ruby opportunities. A lot of people come to Ruby through an interest
in doing Rails development — and that’s great, as long as you take the
time to learn Ruby fully. For the most part, in the seven years I’ve
been using Ruby, people mostly use it because they find it fun and
productive.

**Fabio (Brazil)\>\>** Very difficult thing to explain in few words but
I will try. In my particular case I come from many years developing in
different technologies. Each one was important in its own time.
Technologies as dBase, Delphi, Perl, PHP, Java/J2EE, .NET and so on.
I’ve heard about Ruby around 2001 but I only got back to it around 2005
when I noticed all the excitement around this new comer called Rails. It
certainly surprised me, as a full-time Java developer, to compare both
approaches and see that Ruby inspired me as a programmer. It was that
breath of fresh air that you get once every decade. I am not keen to
just follow ‘conventional wisdom’, I am very fond of experimentation,
learning from my own mistakes. And Ruby began like that: an experiment
that grew on me. I have a feeling that every long time programmer can
feel the same thing. For Ruby’s simplicity, it’s terse syntax, it’s
endless flexibility, the feeling that we can do whatever we want,
whenever we need. For inexperienced programmers there’s the plus side
that the learning curve is very smooth. You can master the basics in a
few days and grow alongside the language and it’s companion technologies
– as Rails. I’d like to think of Ruby as a kind ‘teacher’. It welcomes
you to use it. It shows you hints along the way. You evolve smoothly as
you get intimate with it. A far cry from ‘modern’ languages that seems
to enjoy frightening new comers. Ruby is mature, it’s always evolving,
the community is very caring and actually stay on Ruby because they like
it, not because they are obligated to use it because of market
pressures. Ruby will surprise you, in a good way, and I think that’s
reason enough to at least give it a try.

**Jamie (UK)\>\>** Ruby is an easily understandable and powerful
scripting language. Learning Ruby is easy because of it’s very English
syntax. It’s great as a scripting/automation tool (we use it daily for
lots of different tasks on our servers), and of course with Rails/Merb
it opens the door into web development too.

**Jamis (USA)\>\>** If you’re out to learn an object-oriented language,
Ruby is a prime candidate. The fact that everything is an object means
that you can do some incredibly powerful introspection and reflection.
The simple syntax can be learned quickly, and lets you write libraries
with really concise, really straightforward APIs. And because Ruby pulls
ideas from many other programming languages, you’ll find that once
you’ve learned Ruby, you’re halfway to learning several other languages,
too, like Perl and Smalltalk.

**Jens (Switzerland)\>\>** Ruby does a few things amazingly right: It’s
a small language with a few very well thought out things (the whole OO /
introspection / dynamic evaluation / opening of existing classes).
However, this power is hidden until you actually need it, and you can
start learning Ruby and be very productive from the start. While I’m
sure that it’s possible to abuse Ruby and write programs in your “old
ways” (like the first Pascal program I wrote that looked like my last
Basic Program – one procedure that was several 100 lines long) it gently
puts you on the right track. Working with blocks, iterators etc. gives
you a feeling that “there is a better way” – and there is, when you are
ready for it.

**Juanjo (Spain)\>\>** I think Ruby language is the best tool to learn
OOP. It is complete object orientation and with its natural syntax it
gives you easy access to metaprogramming, dynamic behavior and such
other ‘complicated’ features that can be learned fast. Ruby is also a
great language to start learning by building simple and small tasks
because as you become familiar with the syntax, it is so intuitive that
you find yourself productive right away. Nowadays I think there is one
more reason to learn Ruby: there are a lot of good job opportunities for
a good Ruby/Rails programmer.

**Julian (Netherlands)\>\>** It’s a fantastic language to introduce you
in the world of real OOP. Not the latched-on variety of OOP that is
Python or C++ or PHP or even Java (where you still have primitives), but
the real Smalltalk-inspired OOP. Also, it’s essential to work with
languages whose runtime can change on the fly – where meta code
generation is a workhorse and no preprocessing is taking place. The
language teaches you to be succinct but choose “beautiful” instead of
“practical”: when you are doing Ruby it’s not that much about the script
that will work here and now (whatever the uglyness), but about something
you invest your time in to really get right. When I was discovering Ruby
after doing PHP for a few years it was a revelation for me – the whole
moment went like “oh, that’s how it’s supposed to work all along!” and
“yes, this works too”. For instance, it was a total “oomph” moment for
me when I discovered that you don’t have direct instance variable
assignment from outside of the object. I always wondered why you need
that getFoo/setFoo business in the first place! And never forget that
you learn to program without the “for”-loop. And besides, Ruby does not
create barriers of entry by being too academic. It’s not Smalltalk with
it’s “all or nothing” choice that you have to make (how about abandoning
the file system to program first?), it’s kind of a middle ground. And
the community that Ruby has is really something you can learn from – a
bunch of highly educated, passionate people with deep care for style. As
a result of “beautiful against practical” the quality of libraries is
also something you might want to look at – it’s much higher than any
language I’ve used to date, and you can actually learn something by
reading these libraries.

**Manik (India)\>\>** Ruby is a good language to learn, because it make
you very effective and efficient, you can actually do a lot with just a
few lines of code. There is no excess baggage that comes with Ruby.
Second, it does not restrict the developer in any way, you can reopen
existing classes, you can extend core behaviour. And then Meta
programming enables you to have dynamic behaviour and also makes the
code so readable by writing your own DSL, that is seems as if you are
reading a natural language. One had to read through Rails code to
appreciate the role that a language like Ruby plays in making what Rails
is today. As with any programming language writing code is the best way
to learn Ruby.

**Matt (Australia)\>\>** It is a language that is relatively simple to
grasp while still being amazingly deep and chock full of advanced
concepts. You can talk basic Ruby syntax in a few days, and get started
writing simple programs, then move onto more advanced concepts as your
programming experience and needs expand. For myself, I’ve gotten more a
feel for functional programming concepts while programming Ruby, and I
think it’ll stand me in good stead as the world moves towards natively
parallelisable functional languages like Erlang.

**Mislav (Croatia)\>\>** Ruby was designed to be a natural successor of
other great scripting languages like Perl and Python. I dug Perl a lot,
but it just doesn’t read well. And recently I’ve attended a Python class
where, when being presented with advanced hacks in that language, I kept
thinking to myself that this is cool, but even better in Ruby. Great OOP
support, beautiful syntax, bundled testing framework and a strong
community makes Ruby a winner. Unlike Smalltalk and other obscure but
powerful languages, Ruby was easy to start with. It is harder to learn
in depth than some other popular languages, though; this is because it
provides more. The thing I love most about Ruby is that it makes
beautiful code. Programming is a lot of things, but all of those things
are done by reading and writing source code. I believe in quality by
aesthetics of code just as I believe in productivity by working in a
pleasurable environment.

**Ola (Sweden)\>\>** Ruby as a language is good to learn because it’s
easy to learn, but it still has lots and lots of power. It’s an easy
language to get started with, but a hard language to master. This makes
it rewarding. Many of the features of Ruby will also benefit you when
you’re programming in other languages. For Java developers Ruby can show
you how Object Orientation should work, as an example. The downside of
all this is of course that Ruby can be quite addictive, making it hard
to ever return to other languages.

**Pedro (Portugal)\>\>** After my studies and all the languages and
projects I’ve been involved, I’ve come to realize that ruby mostly
covers some aspects that I come to love and find extremely important
when we’re talking about programming languages. Ruby is pure object
oriented language. After almost 10 years of Perl Programming, which I
still do, Ruby came as nice evolution, not only as a learning
experience, but also at the professional level. Ruby has a strong and
evolving community, which helps to give support and share experience
around it.

**Peter (UK)\>\>** While any Turing-Complete language can perform the
same operations as any other, the important thing is how easy a language
makes the task of programming. Ruby’s flexible syntax, dynamic typing,
interpreted nature and vibrant community are all major plus points for
quick and easy development. While in languages like Java and C++ there’s
a lot of “cruft” and verbosity to fight against in your code, Ruby can
be extremely slick. Learning Ruby also gives you access to Ruby on
Rails, a powerful Web application framework that makes it relatively
easy to develop powerful Web applications in remarkably short periods of
time.

**Remco (Netherlands)\>\>** Ruby has a very low threshold and is
extremely powerful at the same time. My first experience with Ruby was
when I was asked to analyze some text. At first I thought this was a
typical Perl job but a short introduction to Ruby I read some days
earlier, got me started right away. The job was done in a couple of
hours using a language I never used before! Of course there are more
languages which are easy to learn but rarely are they as powerful as
Ruby. The flexibility of Ruby allow you to mold the language to
something that helps do your job. Rails, rake and rspec are examples of
the molding where Ruby is stretched to be a “new” language specialized
in solving particular problem. But the best part is, you can do this
yourself! It isn’t rocket science! There’s one catch for seasoned
programmers, you’ll never want to go back.

**Sau (Singapore)\>\>** The best reason I can think of is that Ruby is a
fun language to learn and to create software with. As professional and
commercial programmers we often lose interest in our job because the
technology we use day in day out is boring, is a drag to use and
difficult to invent truly good software. Ruby is one (among very select
few) such language that can inspire you to new heights of creativity and
let your inner programmer create good software without being dragged
down by the limitations of syntax descriptiveness.

**Satish\>\> How should one go about learning the Ruby language?**

**Agnieszka (Poland)\>\>** I started by writing a Ruby on Rails app,
using numerous free tutorials, blog posts, the Ruby Forum, the Pickaxe
and “Agile Web Development with Rails”. It’s a good route to take for
someone who likes to study with working examples and experimentation as
opposed to systematic perusal of text books. But I don’t recommend it to
newcomers to programming or those who like to understand every bit of
their code from the start, since it can be confusing. Follow the Pickaxe
or other ruby book instead. As far as googling is concerned, I wouldn’t
overrate it. It is perfect for blog posts and tutorials, but not that
good for mailing lists, which offer an abundance of up to date, relevant
information. I recommend searching the Ruby Forum, and also posting your
questions there if you’re lost. Finally, join a local ruby community, or
start one!

**David (USA)\>\>** There are a number of fine books out there,
including the classic “Programming Ruby” as well as “Learn to Program
with Ruby” for people who are new to programming. If you’re focusing on
Rails and want to learn Ruby thoroughly, my book “Ruby for Rails” is a
good bet. In addition to books, keep an eye on the various Ruby blogs
and mailing lists and websites. There’s more than I can summarize here,
but the main Ruby site is
[http://www.ruby-lang.org](http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/), and you can
get a good blog overview at
[http://www.artima.com/buzz/community.jsp?forum=123](http://www.artima.com/buzz/community.jsp?forum=123).
You’ll find a lot of information also at
[http://www.ruby-doc.org](http://www.ruby-doc.org/).

**Fabio (Brazil)\>\>** Fortunately, in this Internet Age, new comers
already have a great bunch of excellent material available. It’s hard to
recommend just a few of them. Google is your friend, and I mean it.
That’s how I learned it and I am confident that you can start in many
ways. If you know English, one great source of material is Ryan Bates’
“Railscasts” video podcast and Geoffrey Grosenbach’s “Peepcode” series.
Amazon lists dozens of Ruby and Rails books already available and lots
more to come. My all time favorite Ruby book is Hal Fulton’s “The Ruby
Way”. A great material not only for starters but also for advanced
programmers. If you’re from Brazil, Ruby is not a reality yet, there are
still few resources in Portuguese. But we fortunately have a very
exciting community going on. I’d refer to the
[rubyonrails.com.br](http://rubyonrails.com.br/) and
[rubyonbr.org](http://rubyonbr.org/) websites as starting points. You
will find a bunch of great people and material that can help you out.

**Jamie (UK)\>\>** Well the easiest option is to get a book, I recommend
‘*The Ruby Way*‘ by Hal Fulton and ‘*Beginning Ruby*‘ by Peter Cooper.

**Jamis (USA)\>\>** It depends on how you learn best, but I learned Ruby
by doing. I had a project in mind that I wanted to write, and I wanted
to learn Ruby, so I put the two together. I made a lot of mistakes, and
I spent a lot of time in the documentation, but by the time I had
finished the project I felt like I had a pretty good grasp of the
language and was better prepared for my next project. There are lots of
books these days that will help you along the path towards Ruby mastery,
so you’re already ahead of the game compared to where I was when I
learned it (the only English resource for learning Ruby when I started
was the Pickaxe, which was fortunately all available online). Another
great way to learn the language is to look at the code for existing
projects. Pick a library that interests you and pick it apart.

**Jens (Switzerland)\>\>** By doing things. Taking small problems,
solving them in Ruby. Or by using Rails, by all means. Rails is great,
because you have to write very little code to get something done.
Writing little in my opinion is a great way to actually learn something.
Opposed to say, Java, where setting up the environment takes the better
part of a day, you are productive immediately (in Rails or pure Ruby).
Then do the simple stuff: Data manipulation, String manipulation, Files.
Write a webserver (using Webrick) in 20 lines of code like I did for a
customer of mine that needs to distribute several 1000 HTML files from
his intranet on CD. Add Ferret (another 5 lines) and you have a working
off-line search-able documentation solution. And when you have written
something, see if you can bring down the lines of code to half of what
you wrote – with Ruby you usually can.

**Juanjo (Spain)\>\>** Coding, trying to build simple programs to solve
small tasks. A good book on OOP is a good idea. A good starting point is
also the Pickaxe combined with some other good Ruby book, I liked ‘Ruby
for Rails’ by David Black. I would recommend to join a mailing list or a
local Ruby group. And if that is not enough for you internet is always
there to check blogs, Ruby sites and Ruby libraries docs.

**Julian (Netherlands)\>\>** First of all, serve yourself with a printed
Pickaxe book and read it cover to cover. Starting with Rails right away
might spoil the experience. Then find a problem domain that you would
like to tackle and know relatively well (something that you want to port
over from your old libraries perhaps?), and make the solution a packaged
gem. Try to change as much as you can when doing this kind of work – if
you are porting over try not to do a “line by line translation” but mold
stuff anew. Do it test-driven and then finish the job by packaging it as
a gem and releasing it, with a Rakefile and all. That way you learn the
toolchain from test-driven development to library structure to
packaging. I did that with
[RuTils](http://rubyforge.org/projects/rutils/) and it gave a great
boost to my understanding of the language. And you will do yourself a
good favor by doing it on a POSIX operating system (Linux and OS X are
both invited).

**Manik (India)\>\>** One can start with the PickAxe book, follow that
with the Little Book of Ruby and Why’s Poignant guide to Ruby. Follow
online tutorials like the one run by [Satish
Talim](http://rubylearning.com/satishtalim/tutorial.html). Reading Rails
code is also an excellent way to hone your Ruby skills. There has been
an explosion in the number of Ruby and Rails blogs and books during this
last one year, so there are a lot of resources available out there for
anybody to start exploring the language.

**Matt (Australia)\>\>** I picked up Ruby by reading the Pickaxe cover
to cover twice, then diving in. However, I’ve done a \*lot\* of
programming in a lot of languages over the years, so I’m probably not
the best model for the average Ruby beginner. The important thing in
learning \*any\* programming language is to practice your skills. You
will get absolutely \*nowhere\* if you’re not constantly exercising your
new-found (and old-learned) skills, and practicing the art of
programming. As far as documentation goes, I recommend [Chris Pine’s
Learn to Program](http://pine.fm/LearnToProgram/) to the people I teach
Ruby, because they’re typically beginners to programming in general, and
Chris’ book is pitched at the “learning to program, using Ruby” market
rather than the “learning to program Ruby”. I like to raise eyebrows by
pointing people at [Why’s (poignant) guide to
Ruby](http://poignantguide.net/ruby/) because reading it is better than
a heavy acid trip. If you’re an accomplished programmer, the Pickaxe is
a good read, and contains a wealth of reference material as well. Pick
up the PDF/hardcopy bundle, too, because while the dead tree is better
for reading, annotating, and bookmarking, the PDF is unbeatable when you
just want to know something quickly about some keyword — you can’t grep
dead trees, after all. Remember, also, that programming isn’t just about
learning the syntax of the language, it’s about the craft of software
development. For that, the book “[The Pragmatic Programmer: From
Journeyman to
Master](http://www.pragmaticprogrammer.com/ppbook/index.shtml)” is a
must, and learning your editor and revision control system really well
pays dividends in the long term too. Don’t stop learning about all
aspects of software construction, and you’ll go far.

**Mislav (Croatia)\>\>** I’ve started with two great, free books: The
“*Pickaxe*” and “*Why’s (Poignant) Guide*“. Also a great way to learn
the language is using the Rails framework. If you want to purchase a
book, I strongly recommend “*Ruby for Rails*” which goes in depths of
the language, explaining stuff you couldn’t find answers for. The recipe
for good learning: have a book open by your side, have Ruby API
documentation open in the browser (always!) and try to solve specific
problems. Start easy. One other important tool for Ruby is “irb” (the
Ruby interactive shell), or “script/console” in Rails apps. Other
scripting languages have their versions of interactive prompts, but
never has there been a more powerful implementation. I “live” in the
console all the time and that kind of instant feedback really boosts my
productivity. Rails beginners and intermediates don’t want to miss
[Railscasts](http://railscasts.com/), and if you can buy something
really cheap but great, there are [Peepcode
screencasts](http://peepcode.com/) for learning practically from every
field.

**Ola (Sweden)\>\>** There is only one good way to learn a new
programming language – use it! Do something useful in it. By all means
read books and so on, but there is no better way to learn a language
than using it. So pick a small to medium sized project and implement it.
I would recommend \_against\_ doing a Rails project to learn Ruby. When
using Rails, one of the problems I’ve seen in many new developers is
that they have a hard time seeing the distinction between Rails and
Ruby. So learn Ruby before learning Rails.

**Pedro (Portugal)\>\>** From my personal experience, I would say to
start learning the basics first, but even for non-programmers, Ruby is
to my opinion a very good starting point. In my case, I’ve bought the
book *Programming Ruby*, and from there was just a matter of time and
practice before I grasped the language, I don’t consider myself yet a
great Ruby hacker but I’m working on it. The important idea when
considering learning is that it should be a phased approach, really
learning one tiny aspect at a time, and take enough practice to dominate
it before you move on to the next thing.

**Peter (UK)\>\>** It depends on your style of learning. Different
people seem to have greatly varying levels of success with different
methods. One way is just to find a few resource Web sites and “play
around” building small programs until you become confident. Another way
is to buy a book (and, naturally, I’d recommend my own “*Beginning
Ruby*” for this!) and follow it through. Yet another way is to get the
source code for existing applications, study the code, make changes, and
pick up the language by osmosis. It really all depends on how you feel
you learn best. I would say, however, that it’s essential that as well
as learning the technical side of things, you also need to learn how the
community around a language works, as you’re going to depend on that
community sooner than later.

**Remco (Netherlands)\>\>** Get the “Programming Ruby” aka “Pickaxe” and
read it. There’s an online version of the first edition but do yourself
a favor and buy the paper(!) version of the second edition. Don’t be
intimidated by it’s 800+ pages, in this case the fattest book is the
best. It reads really easily and will be an indispensable reference.
This book needs to live next to your computer. But the only way to learn
a language is to use it! Make Ruby your golden hammer and try to use it
to solve “all” your computing problems. It is amazingly well suited as a
general purpose language. For instance: startup irb (the interactive
Ruby shell) for simple tasks like making a small calculation, renaming
files, counting the number of items on a website. Last but not least:
read a lot of Ruby code. Find out where the gem installer puts all the
rb-files and investigate them. The ActiveRecord code for instance is an
amazing display of Ruby code, maybe a bit daunting at first but hang in
there. There’s lots to learn from other people’s code.

**Sau (Singapore)\>\>** I believe everyone has a different way of
learning things, including Ruby. For me I learned Ruby from the Pickaxe
book and subsequently just through programming, taking apart someone
elseâ€™s code (usually from Rubyforge) and just more programming.

* * * * *

**Update 3rd Oct.**: I finally managed to talk to **David Black**,
author of [Ruby for Rails](http://www.manning.com/black/) and got his
views too. David’s been traveling a lot lately.

**[Advice For Ruby Beginners
2](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2007/10/01/advice-for-ruby-beginners-2/)**

**[Advice For Ruby Beginners
3](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2007/10/04/advice-for-ruby-beginners-3/)**

Technorati Tags: [Advice For Ruby
Beginners](http://technorati.com/tag/Advice+For+Ruby+Beginners), [Ruby
Beginners](http://technorati.com/tag/Ruby+Beginners), [Ruby
Interviews](http://technorati.com/tag/Ruby+Interviews), [Ruby Serial
Interview](http://technorati.com/tag/Ruby+Serial+Interview)
