---
draft: false
title: 'Interview: Phil Tomson'
date: 2007-04-08
author: Satish Talim
authorlink: "http://satishtalim.com"
socialsharing: true
authorgoogleplus: https://plus.google.com/+SatishTalim/about
authorlinkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/satishtalim
authortwitter: http://twitter.com/IndianGuru
authorfacebook: http://www.facebook.com/rubylearning
categories:
- news
- rails
- ruby
layout: post
---
(This interview appeared before on 18th Aug. 2006 on the PuneRuby blog).

Today, we shall be talking to another Ruby Guru – **Phil Tomson**.<!--more-->

**Satish Talim\>\>** Hello Phil, and welcome to PuneRuby. Could you tell
us something about yourself?

**Phil Tomson\>\>** I started out as a hardware engineer many years ago.
I did board-level and ASIC design in the early 1990’s. Then in the
mid-90’s I transitioned to EDA software development and pretty-much went
to the software side of things. I still enjoy hardware-related
explorations, such as experimenting with FPGAs. I created
[RHDL](http://rhdl.rubyforge.org) which is a hardware design language
and simulator based on Ruby.

Currently I’m fortunate to work at a contract that allows me to do
development on Linux. It’s mostly in C++, but we’re using Ruby to
generate a large amount of our C++ code from XML. So Ruby is playing a
very important role in the project, even if it’s not the starring role.

Other than work, I enjoy coral reef aquaria and I have a 12-gallon
nano-reef in my living room with some live corals and some invertabrates
(shrimp, crabs, snails). I also just finished up my Masters degree in
ECE at Portland State University back in February. My thesis involved
Particle Swarm Optimization and Ant Colony Optimization (I wrote most of
the code for my experiments in Ruby, of course ).

Oh, and I’m not a web programmer. I’ve never used Rails – so Ruby is
also good for non-web development as well.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Given the choices out there, why did you select
Ruby?

**Phil Tomson\>\>** From about 1994 till late 2000 I was a huge Perl
fan. I wrote lots of code in Perl during those years. I liked Perl a lot
at that point. Then I started needed to do some object-oriented Perl and
I realized that Perl just wasn’t designed for that – its OO support is
quite ugly. Sometime in 2000 I thought I should learn Python. I went out
and bought a “Learning Python” book and I sat down and loaded up Python
on my PC. After being bitten by indentation-related bugs a few times in
the first couple of hours, I decided that the whole
indentation-as-syntax idea in Python just wasn’t going to work for me –
I really didn’t want to spend a lot of time trying to figure out why
invisible parts of my code were causing such problems. So after about
three hours of Python, I decided that maybe I should learn to like
object-oriented Perl (the “Learning Python” book still remains on my
shelf gathering dust after all of these years).

Just about the time when I gave up finding some better alternative to
Perl, I found an article about Ruby by Dave Thomas in Dr. Dobb’s
Journal. That was in late 2000 (December, I believe). The thing that
really got me to try Ruby was the mention of Drb, Ruby’s distributed
object system – at the time I needed something like that at work and I
wasn’t getting very far with Perl. So I bought a pickaxe book and
started prototyping the system in Ruby and Drb. After about 3 days of
Ruby programming I found that I felt as comfortable in Ruby as I had
been in Perl (and that was after 6 years of Perl programming). After
another couple of weeks I felt that I was more productive in Ruby than I
ever had been in Perl. So basically, the last Perl code I wrote was
sometime in early 2001 – since then Ruby has been my favorite language
and looking at Perl code now makes my eyes hurt.

…another thing that attracted me to Ruby was the great community.

**Satish Talim\>\>** How did you learn Ruby and when?

**Phil Tomson\>\>** See the response to the last question.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Which features of Ruby do you like the most?

**Phil Tomson\>\>** Code blocks. They’re great for creating DSL’s like
RHDL. That and the cohesiveness of the standard libraries.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Do you think Ruby has the potential to be a
mainstream programming language?

**Phil Tomson\>\>** In some ways I think Ruby has already become a
‘mainstream programming language’ (whatever that means), especially
compared to 2001 when I started using Ruby. Rails and Watir seem to be
pretty popular in their respective domains.

**Satish Talim\>\>** What applications, utilities have you developed in
Ruby and what platform are you running these applications on?

**Phil Tomson\>\>** Early on I wrote a test distribution framework I
called TaskMaster. That was in 2001 just after I first learned Ruby.
Please don’t look at that code as it’s very Perl-ish, and in fact I
don’t think it even runs on Ruby 1.8.x. More recently I developed RHDL,
which I mentioned earlier. I’m currently starting to work on a project I
call Inline::HDL which involves hardware acceleration using FPGAs, (more
details coming soon). I also developed QDL (Quantum Description
Language) a DSL for describing quantum circuits for a class on Quantum
Computing I took a couple of years ago. Also, I’ve been fortunate to be
able to use Ruby in just about every job I’ve had since that fateful one
in 2001. I primarily develop on Linux or OS X.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Anything else you would like to share with the
PuneRuby members?

**Phil Tomson\>\>** It’s great to hear that you have so many members. I
started the Portland Ruby group (PDX.rb ) back in 2002 and until about
mid-2005 we generally only had 3 or 4 people show up to our meetings.
Then came Rails and now we often have 20 and sometimes more.

**Satish Talim\>\>** Thanks Phil for sharing your views with the
PuneRuby members.

