---
draft: false
title: Indian Ruby on Rails Portfolio
date: 2010-02-08
author: Satish Talim
authorlink: "http://satishtalim.com"
socialsharing: true
authorgoogleplus: https://plus.google.com/+SatishTalim/about
authorlinkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/satishtalim
authortwitter: http://twitter.com/IndianGuru
authorfacebook: https://www.facebook.com/rubylearning
categories:
- Rails
- Ruby
- Ruby on Rails
layout: post
permalink: /2010/02/08/indian-ruby-on-rails-portfolio/
tags:
- india
- Indian Ruby on Rails Portfolio
- Ruby
- Ruby on Rails
---
## Indian Ruby on Rails Portfolio

I am compiling a list (in alphabetical order) showcasing Indian websites
made with **Ruby on Rails**. Hat Tip: **[Fabio
Akita](http://akitaonrails.com/2009/12/15/brazilian-ruby-on-rails-portfolio)**<!--more-->

### Adomado

[![Adomado](http://rubylearning.com/images/adomado_logo.png "Adomado")](http://adomado.com/)

**[Adomado](http://adomado.com/)** is India’s first Internet rewards
program. They are an advertising and product offer supported model and
help you to earn exciting rewards for performing a range of online
activities. They also help their users to support their favorite charity
without paying any money. Users can checkout their exciting offers at
[http://adomado.com/inside/my\_offers](http://adomado.com/inside/my_offers)
which they keep on updating from time to time.

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted by [Amazon
EC2](http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/). The contact person is [Mayank
Jain](http://twitter.com/makuchaku) and their ROR development center is
in **New Delhi**.

* * * * *

### Ads4Good

[![Ads4Good](http://rubylearning.com/images/ads4good-tagline.jpg "Ads4Good")](http://app.ads4good.org/)

**[Ads4Good](http://app.ads4good.org/)** is a social venture startup
which provides users with ad-widgets (adjets) that can be easily placed
on websites, blogs and other web pages and the funds generated from ads
on the widget gets donated to support causes of users’ interest. This
makes it an easy, ongoing and sustainable way of contributing back to
society. They also ensure a win-win situation for everyone involved –
users get to donate with no out-of-pocket spend and get visibility of
the impact; organizations get actionable funds; advertising networks get
increased reach.

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted at Linode, Amazon
S3/Cloudfront. The contact person is [Akshay
Surve](mailto:akshay@ads4good.org) and their ROR development center is
in **Mumbai**.

* * * * *

### BubbleIdeas

[![BubbleIdeas](http://rubylearning.com/images/thumbnail.gif "BubbleIdeas")](http://bubbleideas.com/)

**[BubbleIdeas](http://bubbleideas.com/)** is a Gov 2.0 solution,
Organized Crowdsourcing, Customer engagement, Ideas etc. The offering is
SAAS and much more simpler and leaner than most solutions available on
the web.

The site was created in 2010 and is hosted by
[Slicehost](http://www.slicehost.com/). The contact person is [Arvind
Nigam](mailto:arvind@bubbleideas.com) and their ROR development center
is in **Noida**.

* * * * *

### Bukluv

[![Bukluv](http://rubylearning.com/images/bukluv-150-91.png "Bukluv")](http://bukluv.com/)

**[Bukluv](http://bukluv.com/)** is a website dedicated to people who
love reading. Here, registered users can write their opinions on books
they’ve read in the form of mini-reviews which are limited to 250
characters. People can follow others and get a live feed of recently
posted mini-reviews.

The site was created in 2010 and is hosted by hosted by [Hosting
Rails](http://www.hostingrails.com/). The contact person is [Mohammed
Aslam/Nithin Bekal](mailto:ebukuluv@gmail.com) and their ROR development
center is in **Kasaragod, Kerala**.

* * * * *

### BumsOnTheSaddle

[![BumsOnTheSaddle](http://rubylearning.com/images/bots.gif "BumsOnTheSaddle")](http://bumsonthesaddle.com/)

At **[BumsOnTheSaddle](http://bumsonthesaddle.com/)**, they love cycling
and are trying to make a difference in the way cycling is experienced in
India. It is a mass of Rails sites:

-   [Mephisto blog](http://blog.bumsonthesaddle.com/)
-   [Signal Wiki](http://notebook.bumsonthesaddle.com/)
-   and a couple of more features, that are in the pipeline and yet to
    be released. The main site is also going to be refreshed with
    community features using Tog engine.

The site was created in 2006 and is hosted by [Hosting
Rails](http://www.hostingrails.com/). The contact person is [Rohan
Kini](mailto:rohan@bumsonthesaddle.com) and their ROR development center
is in **Bangalore**.

* * * * *

### DoAttend

[![DoAttend](http://rubylearning.com/images/da-logo-180x60.png "DoAttend")](http://doattend.com/)

**[DoAttend](http://doattend.com/)** is an Online Event Registration
Application built for Event Managers. A product of [Tenmiles
Corporation](http://tenmiles.com/), DoAttend lets you create an event
page with a custom URL, setup and sell tickets online, track
registrations real time and much more. It enables Indian event managers
to collect payments online in India Rupees (INR) and provides
integration with Paypal for international customer base. Its free for
Events that don’t have any registration fee and for paid events it
charges the event managers a very small portion of ticket sale price.
There are no setup or monthly fee.

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted by
[Slicehost](http://www.slicehost.com/). The contact person is [Shalin
Jain](mailto:shalin@tenmiles.com) and their ROR development center is in
**Chennai**.

* * * * *

### Dunnitt

[![Dunnitt](http://rubylearning.com/images/dunnitt_logo_beta.png "Dunnitt")](http://www.dunnitt.com/login)

**[Dunnitt](http://www.dunnitt.com/login)** is a new corner of social
networking that has to do with coordinating collaborative activities
with family, friends, office colleagues and others. It is a Universal
Activity Exchange with access to your activities from anywhere, anytime

The site was created in 2010 and is hosted by
[Linode](http://www.linode.com/). The contact person is [Balaji D
Loganathan](mailto:info@spritle.com) and their ROR development center is
in **Chennai**.

* * * * *

### Fedena

[![Fedena](http://rubylearning.com/images/fed%20ico.png "Fedena")](http://www.fedena.com/)

**[Fedena](http://www.fedena.com/)** is an open source school/campus
management system developed using Ruby on Rails. With Fedena, they hope
to be able to provide an easy solution to schools and colleges to manage
their activities online. Fedena has many different fetures such as
student database management, timetable, attendance and examination
results management, and also human resources and finance management.

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted by hosted by [Hosting
Rails](http://www.hostingrails.com/). The contact person is [Arvind
GS](mailto:info@fedena.com) and their ROR development center is in
**Mangalore**.

* * * * *

### HirePlug

[![HirePlug](http://rubylearning.com/images/hplg.gif "HirePlug")](http://www.hireplug.com/)

**[HirePlug](http://www.hireplug.com/)** is a Social Hiring portal.
Their goal is to make hiring fast, effective and fun. Job Boards
seriously lack top talent. The same talent is available on the Social
Networks and is untapped. The idea revolves around providing a unified
platform for Talent Management, Job Board and leveraging social networks
for hiring the top talent by means of referral hiring.

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted by
[ServerLoft](http://www.serverloft.com/). The contact person is [Rajan
Chandi](mailto:chandi.rajan@gmail.com) and their ROR development center
is in **Pune**.

* * * * *

### iloveread.in

[![iloveread.in](http://rubylearning.com/images/i-love-read-logo.jpg "iloveread.in")](http://iloveread.in/)

**[iloveread.in](http://iloveread.in/)** is a book lending library in
Chennai, incubated and based out of IIT-Madras. Customers can register
on the site for free (with their email id) and browse our collection.
They can select a membership plan, pay through their internet gateway
(or by cash) and order books online. The books are delivered to their
house at no extra cost. They also provide recommendations to their users
(especially for school kids) and popular lists of award winning books.
iloveread.in also has tie-ups with schools in Chennai and employs
trained professionals to organize story telling and book reading
sessions, alternative endings and various other activities for students.

The site has been designed for a clean and smooth browsing experience
with loads of AJAX and ample white spaces to avoid clutter. They plan to
introduce a host of other features such as SMS and Gtalk based search
and ordering, use of Adobe Flex for a richer browsing experience,
multi-lingual support for Indian languages and also a very basic HTML
version of the site for slow internet connections.

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted by [Aptana
Cloud](http://www.aptana.com/cloud). The contact person is [Sahil
Gore](mailto:sahilgore@gmail.com) and their ROR development center is in
**Pune**.

* * * * *

### Josh Software Pvt. Ltd.

[![Josh Software Pvt. Ltd.,
Pune](http://rubylearning.com/images/logo-thumbnail.jpg "Josh Software Pvt. Ltd., Pune")](http://www.joshsoftware.com/)

**[Josh Software Pvt. Ltd., Pune](http://www.joshsoftware.com/)**
company’s website was developed using **eJOSH**, an open source custom
[ROR CMS](http://github.com/joshsoftware/ejosh). A great way of showing
that Josh Software is a true Ruby on Rails development company. Some of
the many ROR based sites developed by JoshSoftware are: [Paisa
Matters](http://www.paisamatters.com/) and
[BrandPotion](http://www.brandpotion.com/).

The JoshSoftware site was created in 2009 and is hosted on [linode VPS
server](http://www.linode.com/). The contact person is [Gautam
Rege](mailto:gautam@joshsoftware.com) and their ROR development center
is in **Pune**.

* * * * *

### JusBill.com

[![JusBill.com](http://rubylearning.com/images/LogoJusbill.png "JusBill.com")](http://jusbill.com/)

**[JusBill.com](http://jusbill.com/)** is an extremely simply and easy
application to generate professional invoices. The online system allows
companies to monitor and control their multiple offices & shops; it also
allows manufacturers to streamline and integrate with their dealers. An
offline module that works even when there is no internet; and later
synchronizes with the SaaS based application ensuring that Jusbill is
the complete solution for invoicing needs. The enterprise edition also
features payment & order tracking and ecommerce web-store integration.

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted by [Amazon
EC2](http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/). The contact person is [Vikram
Bahl](mailto:info@sysblitz.com) and their ROR development center is in
**Noida**.

* * * * *

### MangoSpring Engage

[![MangoSpring
Engage](http://rubylearning.com/images/engage%20logo.jpg "MangoSpring Engage")](http://www.engagesmart.com/)

**[MangoSpring Engage](http://www.engagesmart.com/)** is a smart set of
employee communication and social collaboration tools to boost daily
productivity while creating a smart company for this decade. By smart,
they mean Engage infuses intelligence in communication systems and day
to day processes; creating a vibrant, open company. More than a tool,
Engage is a way of working, a way of collaborating and a way of creating
an informed, productive workforce.

The site was created in 2010 and is hosted at
[Adhost](http://www.adhost.com/). The contact person is [Vishwa
Malhotra](mailto:vishwam@mangospring.com) and their ROR development
center is in **Pune**.

* * * * *

### Muziboo

[![Muziboo](http://rubylearning.com/images/muziboo_logo.jpg "Muziboo")](http://www.muziboo.com/)

**[Muziboo](http://www.muziboo.com/)** is an online platform where
musicians & budding talents upload their performances to showcase,
invite reviews, discuss and collaborate. So, what makes Muziboo tick?
The interactive Community. Muziboo is a strongly knit global community
that wickedly indulges day after day in commenting and discussing the
music (posted here) and music related topics. The community here is
eclectic that consumes every genre of music – anything from Rock ‘n’
Roll to Trance and Classical.

In addition, Muziboo as a platform offers a variety of easy tools to
share your music across the Online world – be it your blog or Facebook
or Twitter.

The site was created in 2007 and is hosted by
[Hetzner](http://www.hetzner.de/). The contact person is [Nithya
Dayal](mailto:nithya@muziboo.com/) and their ROR development center is
in **Bangalore**.

* * * * *

### MustSeeIndia

[![MustSeeIndia](http://rubylearning.com/images/logot-full.png "MustSeeIndia")](http://www.mustseeindia.com/)

**[MustSeeIndia](http://www.mustseeindia.com/)** is a travel information
and sharing portal for India. It focuses on providing comprehensive and
reliable information about 400+ tourist destinations in India. Apart
from information, it also provides flight, train and bus ticketing
services as well as hotel bookings via its sub portal
[http://book.mustseeindia.com/](http://book.mustseeindia.com/)

The site was created in 2008 and is hosted by
[SoftLayer](http://softlayer.com/). The contact person is [Sanjay
Goel](mailto:sanjay@mustseeindia.com) and their ROR development center
is in **Bangalore**.

* * * * *

### Naarad

[![Naarad](http://rubylearning.com/images/logo-width-150.jpg "Naarad")](http://www.intinno.com/products/naarad/)

**[Naarad](http://www.intinno.com/products/naarad/)** is a cloud based
secure and powerful academic process management platform that’s
surprisingly affordable! About 10,000 students use this system already.
[Demo URL](http://naarad.in/login): Login: demo and Password: demo12345

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted by [Amazon
EC2](http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/). The contact person is [Mayank
Jain](mailto:mayank@intinno.com) and their ROR development center is in
**Gurgaon**.

* * * * *

### Paathshaala

[![Paathshaala](http://rubylearning.com/images/logo-width-150.jpg "Paathshaala")](http://www.intinno.com/products/paathshaala/)

**[Paathshaala](http://www.intinno.com/products/paathshaala/)** is a
learning management system fostering collaboration between
administration, teachers and students. It is extensively used in IIT
Kharagpur (across 18 departments and over 5000 students) and Sinhgad
College of Engineering. [Demo URL](http://iitkgp.intinno.com/): Email:
profdemo@intinno.com and Password: pd12

The site was created in 2008 and is hosted by [Amazon
EC2](http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/). The contact person is [Mayank
Jain](mailto:mayank@intinno.com) and their ROR development center is in
**Gurgaon**.

* * * * *

### Parasharplus

[![Parasharplus](http://rubylearning.com/images/parasharplus.jpg "Parasharplus")](https://www.parasharplus.com/)

**[Parasharplus](https://www.parasharplus.com/)** is a social networking
portal for astrologers, astrology researchers and those interested in
astrology. The portal provides features to create astrology charts using
Vimshottari Dasha system of vedic astrology and a powerful query engine
to search charts based on planetary positions and/or life events.

The unique feature of the portal is to create community databases of
astrology charts and using a powerful query engine, find patters in
charts and life events to facilitate astrology research.

The social networking features include discussion forums, communities,
scraps, chat, access control, friend list, profile management ; which
enable the astrologers and users to interact with each other to seek
advice and collaborate information.

The social networking features are built as web 2.0 accelerators which
enable the company (www.persistentsys.com) to quickly build social
networking portals for any other domain.

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted at [Persistent Systems
Ltd.](http://www.persistentsys.com/newpspl/index.shtml) The contact
person is [Ashutosh Ambekar](mailto:ashutosh_ambekar@persistent.co.in)
and their ROR development center is in **Pune**.

* * * * *

### Planet Ruby on Rails

[![Planet Ruby on
Rails](http://rubylearning.com/images/planetrubyonrailsnet.png "Planet Ruby on Rails")](http://planetrubyonrails.net/)

**[Planet Ruby on Rails](http://planetrubyonrails.net/)** is a RSS/Atom
feed aggregator. It displays posts of top Ruby on Rails blogs and
related technology blogs. The differentiating features are:

-   you can navigate site using keyboard shortcuts like J, K, H, L, S.
-   You can search within the site.
-   You also get an aggregated feed of this site (50+ subscribers of the
    feed).
-   You can subscribe to the feed and you will get all the posts in a
    feed without subscribing to individual sites feed.
-   Site’s interface is clean and designed for easier readability.

There are other similar Planet Sites with .com and .org domains. But the
main difference is
[planetrubyonrails.net](http://planetrubyonrails.net/) is open source
and the code is available at
[Github](http://github.com/anildigital/planet). You can contribute to it
to make it better.

The first commit was made on 2008-05-25. The site is live from that date
and is hosted by [Slicehost](http://www.slicehost.com/). The site was
coded by [Anil Wadghule](mailto:anil@digitalcodes.org) and he seeks
contributors to it. It will always be free and ad-free. Anil is based in
**Pune**.

* * * * *

### Pravasi Vishwa

[![Pravasi
Vishwa](http://rubylearning.com/images/pravasi_logo.png "Pravasi Vishwa")](http://www.pravasivishwa.com/)

**[Pravasi Vishwa](http://www.pravasivishwa.com/)** is a bilingual
portal in Marathi/English focused on travel information on locations
from India and abroad. This site is a web version of a formally known
publication **Pravasi Diary** which is being published over the last 40
years. The site also contains some unique content that is generally not
available on other travel portals. The site is designed and developed by
[ideaclay](http://ideaclay.com/).

The site was created in 2010 and is hosted by
[DreamHost](http://dreamhost.com/). The contact person is [Sachin
Joshi](mailto:sachin.joshi@ideaclay.com) and their ROR development
center is in **Pune**.

* * * * *

### PurpleTrail

[![PurpleTrail](http://rubylearning.com/images/pt%20logo.jpg "PurpleTrail")](http://www.purpletrail.com/)

**[PurpleTrail](http://www.purpletrail.com/)** is the only online
service that gives you, stylish, ad-free invitations and eCards for
FREE! It now also offers creating and sending *personalized* printed
invitations and cards in minutes. You can order professionally printed
cards or print them at home. It truly is as easy as 1-2-3!

The site was created in 2007 and is hosted at
[Adhost](http://www.adhost.com/). The contact person is [Vishwa
Malhotra](mailto:vishwam@mangospring.com) and their ROR development
center is in **Pune**.

* * * * *

### Quizzing Platform

[![Quizzing
Platform](http://rubylearning.com/images/logo-width-150.jpg "Quizzing Platform")](http://www.intinno.com/products/quizzing/)

**[Quizzing Platform](http://www.intinno.com/products/quizzing/)** is a
Quiz platform aimed to organise the tedious and time-consuming question
bank management process of educational institutes.

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted by [Amazon
EC2](http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/). The contact person is [Mayank
Jain](mailto:mayank@intinno.com) and their ROR development center is in
**Gurgaon**.

* * * * *

### Reviewgang

[![Reviewgang](http://rubylearning.com/images/RG%20logo%20.png "Reviewgang")](http://www.reviewgang.com/)

**[Reviewgang](http://www.reviewgang.com/)** is a RoR based review site
for Indian movies (currently limited to Hindi movies). Reviewgang
provides aggregated and curated critic reviews and ratings, videos,
trailers and synopses of Indian movies. The critic reviews are from main
stream media critics and registered users can add their own reviews and
ratings. The application also provides a list of upcoming movies in
addition to the currently released movies.

The site was created in 2010 and is hosted by
[Hetzner](http://www.hetzner.de/). The contact person is [Manu
J](http://www.manu-j.com/) and their ROR development center is in
**Chennai**.

* * * * *

### Rootein

[![Rootein](http://rubylearning.com/images/rootein_thumbnail.jpg "Rootein")](http://rootein.com/)

**[Rootein](http://rootein.com/)** is a web app that lets you build
habits and track progress as you go along. It keeps you motivated like
you’ve never experienced before. The calendar that makes it simple to
track your progress, the daily reminders, and the slack detector, which
will gently nudge you if it finds you go missing too many days in a row,
are all designed to make the serious task of building habits fun enough
so you never lose interest.

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted by
[Webfaction](http://www.webfaction.com/). The contact persons are its
founders [Amitabh Jotwani & Kunal Dua](http://twitter.com/makuchaku) and
their ROR development center is in **New Delhi**.

* * * * *

### Salaree.com

[![Salaree.com](http://rubylearning.com/images/logo_salaree.png "Salaree.com")](http://salaree.com/)

**[Salaree.com](http://salaree.com/)** is an Online Payroll Application
designed for Indian businesses. With their friendly application a
business can do their monthly payroll quickly and accurately.
Salaree.com offers all the usual modules familiar to Payroll accountants
and HR folks like PF, ESI, TDS etc. They also provide an attendance
module among many others. You can also email password protected payslips
PDFs to employees as well as inform them via email. In the near future
they will also have E-Filing of Taxes.

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted by
[Hetzner](http://www.hetzner.de/). The contact person is [Aditya
Sanghi](mailto:asanghi@salaree.com) and their ROR development center is
in **Jaipur, Rajasthan**.

* * * * *

### ShipX

[![ShipX](http://rubylearning.com/images/ShipX.png "ShipX")](http://www.shipx.in/)

**[ShipX](http://www.shipx.in/)** is India’s first web-based freight
shopping and booking platform. Their goal is to revolutionize the way
shippers search, book, and ship their freight. Their easy-to-use portal
helps shippers to instantly get competitive quotes from top-quality
service providers, compare them side-by-side, make a choice, and book
their shipment.

They are working on their beta release, it will be launched in about a
month’s time. Alpha version (to understand the market and customer
needs) was launched in later half of 2008 and was well received.

The site is hosted by [Slicehost](http://www.slicehost.com/). The
contact person is [Abhinav Saxena](mailto:asaxena@shipx.in) and their
ROR development center is in **Bangalore**.

* * * * *

### Sokrati

[![Sokrati](http://rubylearning.com/images/sokrati_logo.gif "Sokrati")](http://sokrati.com/)

**[Sokrati](http://sokrati.com/)** is a performance based digital
marketing platform. Sokrati SearchAds is their flagship product that
provides SEM agencies & end-advertisers a completely automated hassle
free search marketing platform. Sokrati is based on their
[platform](http://sem.sokrati.com/login) is which is built using RoR.

The site was created in 2008 and is hosted by [Amazon
EC2](http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/). The contact person is [Anubhav
Sonthalia](mailto:anubhav@sokrati.com) and their ROR development center
is in **Pune**.

* * * * *

### Sysblitz

[![Sysblitz](http://rubylearning.com/images/sysblitz.png "Sysblitz")](http://sysblitz.com/)

**[Sysblitz](http://sysblitz.com/)** is an Integrated Suite of On Demand
Business Applications designed for the Small & Medium Enterprise. It
comprises several business applications which can be used individually
or an in integrated fashion depending upon the size and needs of the
business. Sysblitz CRM is the Sales Force Automation Tool; Sysblitz
Workforce provides a Human Resource Management application; Sysblitz ERP
helps manufacturers and traders to manage Inventory, Invoicing,
Payments; Sysblitz Financials manages accounting and financial
management.

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted by [Amazon
EC2](http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/). The contact person is [Navin Singh /
Vikram Bahl](mailto:info@sysblitz.com) and their ROR development center
is in **Noida**.

* * * * *

### UnitedProsperity

[![UnitedProsperity](http://rubylearning.com/images/uplogo.jpg "UnitedProsperity")](http://www.unitedprosperity.org/)

**[UnitedProsperity](http://www.unitedprosperity.org/)** is a non-profit
organization that helps you **combat extreme global poverty** powerfully
by **multiplying the impact of your money** through loan guarantees. It
is the world’s first social guaranteeing website.

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted by
[A2Hosting](http://www.a2hosting.com/). The contact person is
[Bhalchander Vishwanath](mailto:contactus@unitedprosperity.org) and
their ROR development center is in **Chennai**.

* * * * *

### VectorBrookMath

[![VectorBrookMath](http://rubylearning.com/images/vblogo.png "VectorBrookMath")](http://vectorbrookmath.com/)

**[VectorBrookMath](http://vectorbrookmath.com/)** is a novel online
platform for learning and practicing mathematics. Using a set of
algorithms, VectorBrookMath.com can generate problems on each topic,
giving the student virtually boundless practice opportunities.
VectorBrookMath.com currently has content for standards 7, 8, 9 and 10
for CBSE, ICSE, and 13 state boards. There is no charge to use the
platform.

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted by
[Slicehost](http://www.slicehost.com/). The contact person is [Ashwin
Mangale](mailto:rails@vectorbrook.com) and their ROR development center
is in **Pune**.

* * * * *

### WebROaR

[![WebROaR](http://rubylearning.com/images/webroar-logo.gif "WebROaR")](http://webroar.in/)

**[WebROaR](http://webroar.in/)** is an application server that makes
deployments of Ruby web applications extremely simple. It provides an
integrated solution to view the run time performance numbers and email
notifications in case any exceptions occur in any of the deployed
applications. The server’s extremely user friendly admin panel itself is
a Ruby on Rails application.

The server is 5 to 55% faster than all other comparable deployment
stacks for Ruby on Rails applications. It is freely available under
GPLv3.

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted by
[Slicehost](http://www.slicehost.com/). The contact person is [Aditya
Babbar](mailto:aditya.babbar@webroar.in) and their ROR development
centers are in **Indore** and **Noida**.

* * * * *

### Whol.ly

[![Whol.ly](http://rubylearning.com/images/Wholly.png "Whol.ly")](http://whol.ly/)

**[Whol.ly](http://whol.ly/)** brings the power of local currencies and
the best of social networking to your neighborhood. Their purpose is to
dramatically improve communication across neighborhoods while
stimulating solidarity and creative activity among neighbors.

The site was created in 2009 and is hosted by [Amazon
EC2](http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/). The contact person is [Abhishek
Parolkar](mailto:abhishek@whol.ly) and their ROR development center is
in **Bangalore**.

* * * * *

## Update

I’ll be updating this page from time to time. If you are the owner /
developer of such a website(s), then I would appreciate if you would
send me by email, as much information about the same. Namely:

1.  150×91 thumbnail and the URL to the website.
2.  4-5 line details about this website(s) that includes what the site
    is about, when (year) it was created, the contact person’s name and
    email id, the name and URL of the hosting company where the site is
    hosted.

If you are aware of any such Indian website(s) made with Ruby on Rails,
please send me the following -

1.  the URL of the website(s).
2.  the contact person’s email id, if known.

Thank you for your time and help.
